From: Richa Sharma <richa171@gmail.com>
Date: Thu, 27 Feb 2025 10:09:20 +0530
X-Gm-Features: AQ5f1JoZ6oZnN-Dqn0IXWOm_XrOAZXEpPmGm9B3GbRPBj3qeQ-kbq1NAjDNMg9Q
Message-ID: <CADPEduWrsTHsprtv1+GNREcq5F2LJCCh3dj_vT921rkxTrFNQg@mail.gmail.com>
Subject: Re: Respect sir
To: uma bagla <bagla.uma@gmail.com>, Monty.gyanchandani@hdfcbank.com, Rohan <rohan@indotechmeter.com>
Content-Type: multipart/alternative; boundary="000000000000f2a2f1062f184640"

--000000000000f2a2f1062f184640
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="UTF-8"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: quoted-printable

Hello Monty ji,

This was a genuine transaction done against a property transfer. We have
the deed and transaction details to prove the same as done on Feb 1st.

Thereafter, the other party has wrongfully involved us in matter and we
(uma Bagla) are not privy to the property dispute that goes with it.

I request HDFC to release these blocked funds as soon as possible for Uma
Bagla. Please respond with a tentative timeline as to when this will be
done so that we can plan accordingly.

In case you need a legal representation from us, we are happy to do so too.
Please let us know.

Regards
Richa
Daughter of Uma Bagla, assisting on her behalf`

On Thu, Feb 27, 2025, 9:28=E2=80=AFAM uma bagla <bagla.uma@gmail.com> wrote=
:

>
> ---------- Forwarded message ---------
> From: Monty Gyanchandani <Monty.Gyanchandani@hdfcbank.com>
> Date: Thu, 27 Feb 2025 at 9:22=E2=80=AFAM
> Subject: RE: Respect sir
> To: uma bagla <bagla.uma@gmail.com>
> Cc: Ishvar Tiwari <Ishvar.Tiwari@hdfcbank.com>
>
>
> Classification - Confidential
>
> Classification - Confidential
>
> Ma=E2=80=99am
>
>
>
> Pls find FIR copy as discussed.
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
> Warm Regards,
>
>
>
> Monty Gyan Chandani
>
> Branch Manager
>
> Branch : Birhana Road Kanpur
>
> My Phone Number : 8004523078
>
> My Cluster Head: Sandeep Kar
>
> CH Phone Number:- 8299549362
>
> HDFC Bank Phone Banking Number : 09935903333
>
>
>
> Experience smarter way to on-line shopping at *www.offers.smartbuy.hdfcba=
nk.com
> <http://www.offers.smartbuy.hdfcbank.com/>*
>
>
>
>
> Classification - Confidential
> From: uma bagla <bagla.uma@gmail.com>
> *Sent:* 25 February 2025 10:44
> *To:* Monty Gyanchandani <Monty.Gyanchandani@hdfcbank.com>
> *Subject:* Respect sir
>
>
>
> You don't often get email from bagla.uma@gmail.com. Learn why this is
> important <https://aka.ms/LearnAboutSenderIdentification>
>
> *(Warning) -This is an External Email**: Be very careful before clicking
> on any Links/ Sharing data / Downloading attachments.*
>
>
>
> I am here Uma Bagla . I am a senior citizen I sell my portion to Mr.
> Hemant Bagla and Archna Bagla.I have signed all the documents a gave a ke=
y
> of my portion. I am not able to understand that why they put my money on
> hold.I am very thankful to you if you please provide me a copy of FIR.
>
> Thanking you
>
> Uma bagla
> [image: HDFC Bank Disclaimer]
>
> Classification - Confidential
>

--000000000000f2a2f1062f184640
Content-Type: text/html; charset="UTF-8"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: quoted-printable
