Cambridge Lower Secondary Mathematics Lynn Byrd, Greg Byrd & Chris Pearce WORKBOOK 8 Second edition Digital access SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

Cambridge Lower Secondary Mathematics Greg Byrd, Lynn Byrd & Chris Pearce WORKBOOK 8 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA 477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia 314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre, New Delhi – 110025, India 79 Anson Road, #06–04/06, Singapore 079906 Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge. It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence. www.cambridge.org Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108746403 © Cambridge University Press 2021 This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press. First published 2014 Second edition 2021 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Printed in Dubai by Oriental Press A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library ISBN 978-1-108-74640-3 Paperback with Digital Access Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate. Information regarding prices, travel timetables and other factual information given in this work is correct at the time of first printing but Cambridge University Press does not guarantee the accuracy of such information thereafter. NOTICE TO TEACHERS IN THE UK It is illegal to reproduce any part of this work in material form (including photocopying and electronic storage) except under the following circumstances: (i) where you are abiding by a licence granted to your school or institution by the Copyright Licensing Agency; (ii) where no such licence exists, or where you wish to exceed the terms of a licence, and you have gained the written permission of Cambridge University Press; (iii) where you are allowed to reproduce without permission under the provisions of Chapter 3 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, which covers, for example, the reproduction of short passages within certain types of educational anthology and reproduction for the purposes of setting examination questions. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

3 Contents How to use this book 5 Acknowledgements 6 1 Integers 1.1 Factors, multiples and primes 7 1.2 Multiplying and dividing integers 9 1.3 Square roots and cube roots 11 1.4 Indices 12 2 Expressions, formulae and equations 2.1 Constructing expressions 14 2.2 Using expressions and formulae 18 2.3 Expanding brackets 22 2.4 Factorising 26 2.5 Constructing and solving equations 29 2.6 Inequalities 35 3 Place value and rounding 3.1 Multiplying and dividing by 0.1 and 0.01 40 3.2 Rounding 43 4 Decimals 4.1 Ordering decimals 47 4.2 Multiplying decimals 50 4.3 Dividing by decimals 54 4.4 Making decimal calculations easier 58 5 Angles and constructions 5.1 Parallel lines 62 5.2 The exterior angle of a triangle 65 5.3 Constructions 67 6 Collecting data 6.1 Data collection 69 6.2 Sampling 71 7 Fractions 7.1 Fractions and recurring decimals 74 7.2 Ordering fractions 77 7.3 Subtracting mixed numbers 80 7.4 Multiplying an integer by a mixed number 84 7.5 Dividing an integer by a fraction 88 7.6 Making fraction calculations easier 92 8 Shapes and symmetry 8.1 Quadrilaterals and polygons 96 8.2 The circumference of a circle 102 8.3 3D shapes 105 9 Sequences and functions 9.1 Generating sequences 112 9.2 Finding rules for sequences 116 9.3 Using the nth term 120 9.4 Representing simple functions 123 10 Percentages 10.1 Percentage increases and decreases 130 10.2 Using a multiplier 132 11 Graphs 11.1 Functions 135 11.2 Plotting graphs 137 11.3 Gradient and intercept 140 11.4 Interpreting graphs 143 Contents SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

4 12 Ratio and proportion 12.1 Simplifying ratios 147 12.2 Sharing in a ratio 151 12.3 Ratio and direct proportion 154 13 Probability 13.1 Calculating probabilities 159 13.2 Experimental and theoretical probabilities 162 14 Position and transformation 14.1 Bearings 165 14.2 The midpoint of a line segment 171 14.3 Translating 2D shapes 174 14.4 Reflecting shapes 178 14.5 Rotating shapes 184 14.6 Enlarging shapes 188 15 Distance, area and volume 15.1 Converting between miles and kilometres 193 15.2 The area of a parallelogram and trapezium 197 15.3 Calculating the volume of triangular prisms 202 15.4 Calculating the surface area of triangular prisms and pyramids 206 16 Interpreting and discussing results 16.1 Interpreting and drawing frequency diagrams 210 16.2 Time series graphs 214 16.3 Stem-and-leaf diagrams 219 16.4 Pie charts 222 16.5 Representing data 227 16.6 Using statistics 231 Contents SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

1 Record, organise and represent data How to use this book This workbook provides questions for you to practise what you have learned in class. There is a unit to match each unit in your Learner’s Book. Each exercise is divided into three parts: • Focus: these questions help you to master the basics • Practice: these questions help you to become more confident in using what you have learned • Challenge: these questions will make you think very hard. You will also find these features: Words you need to know. Step-by-step examples showing how to solve a problem. Questions marked with this symbol help you to practise thinking and working mathematically. 5 How to use this book SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

6 Acknowledgements The authors and publishers acknowledge the following sources of copyright material and are grateful for the permissions granted. While every effort has been made, it has not always been possible to identify the sources of all the material used, or to trace all copyright holders. If any omissions are brought to our notice, we will be happy to include the appropriate acknowledgements on reprinting. Thanks to the following for permission to reproduce images: Cover Photo: ori-artiste/Getty Images ROBERT BROOK/Getty Images; Michael Dunning/Getty Images; Liyao Xie/Getty Images; Richard Drury/Getty Images; Aaron Foster/ Getty Images; EyeEm/Getty Images; Tuomas Lehtinen/Getty Images; MirageC/Getty Images; yuanyuan yan/Getty Images; MirageC/Getty Images; Pongnathee Kluaythong/EyeEm/Getty Images; Pietro Recchia/EyeEm/ Getty Images; Yagi Studio/Getty Images SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

7 Key words factor tree highest common factor (HCF) lowest common multiple (LCM) prime factor 1.1 Factors, multiples and primes 1 Integers Exercise 1.1 Focus 1 a Draw a factor tree for 250 that starts with 2×125. b Can you draw a different factor tree for 250 that starts with 2×125? Give a reason for your answer. c Draw a factor tree for 250 that starts with 25×10. d Write 250 as a product of its prime factors. 2 a Draw a factor tree for 300. b Draw a different factor tree for 300. c Write 300 as a product of prime numbers. 3 a Write as a product of prime numbers i 6 ii 30 iii 210 b What is the next number in this sequence? Why? 4 Work out a 2×3×7 b 22×32×72 c 23×33×73 5 a Draw a factor tree for 8712. b Write 8712 as a product of prime numbers. 6 Write each of these numbers as a product of its prime factors. a 96 b 97 c 98 d 99 Practice 7 Write as a product of prime numbers a 70 b 702 c 703 8 a Write each square number as a product of its prime factors. i 9 ii 36 iii 81 iv 144 v 225 vi 576 vii SAMPLE 625 viii 2401 We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

1 Integers 8 b When a square number is written as a product of prime numbers, what can you say about the factors? c 176400=24×32×52×72 Use this fact to show that 176 400 is a square number. 9 315=32×5×7 252=22×32×7 660=22×3×5×11 Use these facts to find the highest common factor of a 315 and 252 b 315 and 660 c 252 and 660 10 60=22×3×5 72=23×32 75=3×52 Use these facts to find the lowest common multiple of a 60 and 72 b 60 and 75 c 72 and 75 11 a Write 104 as a product of its prime factors. b Write 130 as a product of its prime factors. c Find the HCF of 104 and 130. d Find the LCM of 104 and 130. 12 a Write 135 as a product of prime numbers. b Write 180 as a product of prime numbers. c Find the HCF of 135 and 180. d Find the LCM of 135 and 180. Challenge 13 a Write 343 as a product of prime numbers. b Write 546 as a product of prime numbers. c Find the HCF of 343 and 546. d Find the LCM of 343 and 546. 14 Find the LCM of 42 and 90. 15 a Find the HCF of 168 and 264. b Find the LCM of 168 and 264. 16 a Show that the LCM of 48 and 25 is 1. b Find the HCF of 48 and 25. 17 The HCF of two numbers is 6. The LCM of the two numbers is 72. What are the two numbers? SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

9 1.2 Multiplying and dividing integers 5 Work out a (3+4)×5 b (3+−4)×5 c (−3+−4)×−5 d (3+−4)×−5 Practice 6 Estimate the answers by rounding numbers to the nearest integer. a −2.9×−8.15 b 10.8×−6.1 c (−8.8)2 d (−4.09)2 7 Show that (−6)2+(−8)2−(−10)2=0 8 This is a multiplication pyramid. Each number is the product of the two numbers below. For example, 3×−2=−6 a Copy and complete the pyramid. b Show that you can change the order of the numbers on the bottom row to make the top number 3456. 1.2 Multiplying and dividing integers Key word integer Exercise 1.2 Focus 1 Copy this sequence of multiplications and add three more multiplications in the sequence. 7×−4=−28 5×−4=−20 3×−4=−12 1×−4=−4 2 Work out a −5×8 b −5×−8 c −9×−11 d −20×−6 3 Put these multiplications into two groups. A −12×−3 B (−6)2 C −4×9 D 18×2 E 9×−4 F −4×−9 4 Copy and complete this multiplication table. × −4 −9 −6 5 −45 −8 −16 –6 3 –2 4–1 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

10 1 Integers 9 a The product of two integers is −6. Find all the possible values of the two integers. b The product of two integers is 6. Find all the possible values of the two integers. 10 a Here is a multiplication: −9×−7=63 Write it as a division in two different ways. b Here is a different multiplication: 12×−7=−84 Write it as a division in two different ways. 11 Work out a 42÷−7 b −50÷−10 c 27÷−3 d −52÷−4 e 60÷−5 12 Estimate the answers by rounding numbers to the nearest 10. a 92÷−28.5 b −41÷−18.9 c 83.8÷−11.6 d −77÷19 Challenge 13 Copy and complete this multiplication pyramid. –3 15 270 –3 14 Find the value of y. a −8×y=48 b y×−3=−36 c −10×y=120 d y×−5=−40 15 Find the value of z. a z÷−4=−8 b z÷−2=20 c −36÷z=9 d 30÷z=−6 16 a Here is a statement: −3×(−6×−4)=(−3×−6)×−4 Is it true or false? Give a reason to support your answer. b Here is a statement: −24÷(−4÷−2)=(−24÷−4)÷−2 Is it true or false? Give a reason to support your answer. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

11 1.3 Square roots and cube roots 2 Work out a 43 b (−6)3 c (−10)3 d (−1)2+(−1)3 3 If possible, work out a −64 b −64 3 c −125 3 d −729 3 Practice 4 Solve each equation. a x2=25 b x2=225 c x2−81=0 d x2+121=0 5 Solve each equation. a x3=216 b x3=−216 c x3+1000=0 d x3+8000=0 6 232=529 and 233=12167 Use these facts to solve the following equations. a x2=529 b x2+529=0 c x3=12167 d x3+12167=0 7 Write whether each statement is true or false. a 9 is a rational number b −9 is a natural number c 99 is an integer d −999 is both an integer and a rational number e 9999 is both a natural number and a rational number Challenge 8 a Copy and complete this table. x −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 x2+x 0 x3+x 0 b Use the table to solve these equations. i x2+x=2 ii x3+x=2 1.3 Square roots and cube roots Key words natural numbers rational numbers Exercise 1.3 Focus 1 Work out a 142 b (−14)2 c (−20)2 d (−30)2 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

12 1 Integers 1.4 Indices Key words index power 9 Here is an equation: x3−x=120 a Is x=5 a solution? Give a reason for your answer. b Is x=−5 a solution? Give a reason for your answer. 10 a Write 64 as a product of its prime factors. b Show that 64 is a square number and a cube number. c Write 729 as a product of prime numbers. d Show that 729 is both a square number and a cube number. e Find another integer that is both a square number and a cube number. 11 Look at the following solution of the equation x6=64 x6=64 so x3=8 so x=2 There is an error in this solution. Write a corrected version. Exercise 1.4 Focus 1 Write as a single power a 32×3 b 7×73 c 12×125 d 154×15 2 Write as a single power a 63×63 b 105×102 c 36×33 d 143×144 3 a Show that 20+21+22+23=24 – 1 b Can you find a similar expression for 20+21+22+23+24+25 ? c Read what Zara says: 30+31+32+33=34−1 Is she correct? Give a reason for your answer. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

13 1.4 Indices Practice 4 Write as a single power a 53 2 ( ) b 153 2 ( ) c 73 3 ( ) d 34 5 ( ) 5 a Write 4 as a power of 2. b Write 43 as a power of 2. c Write 93 as a power of 3. 6 54=625 Write as a power of 5 a 6252 b 6253 c 6254 7 Find the missing power. a 42×4 =45 b 74×7 =76 c 153×15 =156 d 15 ×154=154 8 Work out and write the answer in index form. a 83÷8 b 56÷52 c 210÷22 d 36÷33 e 124÷124 9 Find the missing power of 6. a 65÷6 =62 b 68÷6 =64 c 6 ÷62=66 d 6 ÷63=63 Challenge 10 Work out and write the answer in index form. a 45÷23 b 94÷35 c 322÷26 d 272÷36 11 Write as a power of 5 a 125 b 1252 c 1254 12 124=20736 Write as a power of 12 a 20 7362 b 207363 c 20736 13 Read what Marcus says: Is Marcus correct? Give a reason to support your answer. 24=42 and so 34=4 SAMPLE 3 We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

14 Key words equivalent expression unknown 2.1 Constructing expressions 2 Expressions, formulae and equations Exercise 2.1 Focus You can write an algebraic expression by using a letter to represent an unknown number. This bag contains x balls. Look at the different expressions that could be written about the bag. I take 3 balls out which leaves x – 3 x balls I take 5 balls out which leaves x – 5 I add 2 balls, so there are now x + 2 I add 4 balls, so there are now x + 4 1 This bag contains y counters. Match each statement on the left with the correct expression on the right. The first one is done for you: A and ii A I add 1 counter to the bag, so there are now i y−8 B I take 1 counter out of the bag, which leaves ii y+1 C I add 5 counters to the bag, so there are now iii y−5 D I take 5 counters out of the bag, which leaves iv y+8 E I add 8 counters to the bag, so there are now v y+5 F I take 8 counters out of the bag, which leaves vi y−1 SAMPLE y counters We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

15 2.1 Constructing expressions 2 This box contains some books. I double the number of books in the box. Copy and complete the working to show how many books are in the box now, when the box started with a 3 books: 3×2= b 5 books: 5×2= c 8 books: 8× = d x books: x× =2x e y books: y× = f b books: b× = 3 This tin contains some sweets. I halve the number of sweets in the tin. Copy and complete the working to show how many sweets are in the tin now, when the tin started with a 4 sweets: 4÷2= b 10 sweets: 10÷2= c 12 sweets: 12÷ = d x sweets: x÷ = x 2 e y sweets: y÷ = 2 f s sweets: s÷ = 4 Zalika has a box that contains c one-dollar coins. Choose the correct expression from the cloud to show the total number of one-dollar coins in the box when a she takes 2 out b she puts 2 more in c she takes out half of the coins d she doubles the number of coins in the box. 5 Match each description on the left with the correct expression on the right. The first one is done for you: A and v A Multiply n by 3 and subtract 8 i 3(n+8) B Add 8 and n then multiply by 3 ii 8(n+3) C Multiply n by 3 and add 8 iii 3(n−8) D Add 3 and n then multiply by 8 iv 8(n−3) E Subtract 3 from n then multiply by 8 v 3n−8 F Subtract 8 from n then multiply by 3 vi 3n+8 When you double the number, you × by 2. When you halve the number, you ÷ by 2. c 2 c−2 c+2 2c SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

16 2 Expressions, formulae and equations Practice 6 Shen thinks of a number, n. Write an expression for the number Shen gets when he a multiplies the number by 7 then adds 4 b divides the number by 6 then subtracts 8 c adds 4 to the number then divides by 5 d subtracts 4 from the number then divides by 5. 7 a Sort these cards into groups of equivalent expressions. A 7 8 × x B x − 7 8 C x + 7 8 D 7 8 + x E x 8 × 7 F 7 8 × x G 7 8 x H 7 8 + x I x + 7 8 J 7 8 x b Which card is on its own? 8 This is part of Kim’s homework. Question Write an expression for a one-fifth of x add 7 b six subtract two-thirds of y Answers a x+7 5 b 6 – 2y 3 Are Kim’s answers correct? If not, write the correct answers. 9 a Write an expression for i one-quarter of x add 5 ii three-fifths of x subtract two iii one add one-half of x iv eleven subtract five-sixths of x. b Describe in words each of these expressions. i x 2 − 9 ii 2 3 10 x + iii 25 2 9 − x iv 12 7 10 + SAMPLE x We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

17 2.1 Constructing expressions Challenge 10 Write an expression for the perimeter and an expression for the area of each rectangle. Simplify each expression. a v + 3cm 8wcm b 9xcm 5 y cm 8 11 The longest side of a triangle is acm. The second side is bcm shorter than the first side. The third side is half as long as the second side. Write an expression, in its simplest form, for the perimeter of the triangle. 12 The price of one kilogram of lemons is $l. The price of one kilogram of potatoes is $p. The price of one kilogram of rice is $r. Write an expression for the total cost of a 1 kilogram of potatoes, 3 kilograms of lemons and 2 kilograms of rice b 3 kilograms of potatoes and one-quarter of a kilogram of rice c 200 grams of rice d 600 grams of rice and 750 grams of lemons. 13 Sion thinks of a number, y. Choose the correct expression from the cloud for when Sion a adds 3 to one-quarter of y, then multiplies by 8 b adds 8 to one-third of y, then multiplies by 4 c adds 4 to three-quarters of y, then multiplies by 8 d adds 3 to three-eighths of y, then multiplies by 4. Tip Start by writing expressions for the second and third sides. Tip What fraction of 1kg is 200g? 4 8 3 y +       8 4 3 4 y +       4 3 3 8 y +       8 3 4 y +       SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

18 2 Expressions, formulae and equations 2.2 Using expressions and formulae Key words formula formulae substitute Exercise 2.2 Focus A formula is a mathematical rule that connects two or more quantities. It can be written in letters or words. The plural of formula is formulae. Before you start using formulae, you need to be able to substitute numbers into expressions. 1 Match each expression with its correct value when x=6. The first one is done for you: A and iii A x+3 i 13 B x−5 ii 4 C 7+x iii 9 D 10−x iv 12 E 2x v 3 F x 2 vi 1 2 Work out the value of each expression when x=4 and y=3. a x+y b x−y c y2 3 Complete the working to find the value of each expression when x=6 a 2x+1 2×x+1=2×6+1 =12+1 = b 3x−1 3×x−1=3×6−1 = −1 = c 2x2 2×x2=2×62 =2×36 = Tip A is x+3= 6+3=9. This matches with iii. Tip x+y=4+3=? Tip y2=y×y (Work out the multiplication before the addition) (Work out the multiplication before the subtraction) Tip When you substitute numbers into an expression or formula, you must use the correct order of operations: brackets, indices, division, multiplication, addition, subtraction. (Work out the indices before SAMPLE the multiplication) We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

19 2.2 Using expressions and formulae d 10− x 3 10− x 3 =10−6 3 =10− = e 2(x+4) 2×(x+4)=2×(6+4) =2× = 4 Work out the value of the expression a a+3 when a=7 b b+6 when b=−4 c 3c when c=−3 d d 5 when d=−35 e a+b when a=3 and b=−5 f c−d when c=14 and d=7 g 5e+2f when e=3 and f=5 h 2(g+h) when g=9 and h=−20 i 3x−7 when x=−5 j 10(9−x) when x=6 k x 4 −10 when x=20 l x y 2 10 + when x=30 and y=−30. 5 Use the formula H=kv to work out the value of H when a k=9 and v=3 b k=8 and v=−2. (Work out the division before the subtraction) (Work out the bracket before the multiplication) Practice 6 Work out the value of the expression a a2−6 when a=4 b 30−b2 when b=6 c a2+b2 when a=3 and b=4 d c2−d2 when c=5 and d=6 e 3p2 when p=4 f 5q2+1 when q=10 g t3 when t=2 h 10v3 when v=4 i z3−2 when z=2 j s 3 10 when s=10 k 2(m2+3) when m=−4 l 5(n3+10) when n=−2. 7 a Write a formula for the number of seconds in any number of minutes, using i words ii letters. b Use your formula from part a to work out the number of seconds in 30 minutes. 8 Use the formula d=16t+38 to work out d when t=2. Tip 10v3= 10×v×v×v SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

20 2 Expressions, formulae and equations 9 Harsha uses the formula V Ah = 3 to work out V when A=6 and h=12. This is what she writes. V= 6+12 3 = 18 3 = 6 a Explain the mistake she has made. b Work out the correct answer. 10 Use the formula A h a b = × ( ) + 2 to work out A when a=5, b=7 and h=4. 11 Pedro uses this formula to work out the volume of a triangular-based pyramid: V bhl = 6 where: V is the volume b is the base h is the height l is the length. Pedro compares two pyramids. Pyramid A has a base width of 4 cm, base length of 3 cm and height of 16 cm. Pyramid B has a base width of 6 cm, base length of 4cm and height of 8 cm. Which pyramid has the larger volume? Show your working. 12 Make x the subject of each formula. Write if A, B or C is the correct answer. a y=x−8 A x=y−8 B x=y+8 C x=8y b y=kx A x=ky B x= y k C x= k y c y=x+w A x=y−w B x=y+w C x=w−y d y= x r A x= y r B x= r y C x=ry e y=2x+t A x= y t + 2 B x=2y+t C x= y t − 2 Tip Remember that bhl means b×h×l. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

2.2 Using expressions and formulae 21 Challenge 13 When x=−4, all of these expressions except one have the same value. Which is the odd one out? x2 − 7 ( ) x +1 2 − 36 x x − 5 2 17 x + 5 − x 14 Write any values of x that make each pair of expressions equal. a 3x+1 and 3x2+1 b 4−x and x−4 c 5 2 x +5 and 2 5 x +5 d 3(x+2) and 2(x+3) 15 a Use the formula D=wp+4 to work out the value of D when w=2.5 and p=6. b Rearrange the formula D=wp+4 to make p the subject. c Use your formula to work out the value of p when D=100 and w=12. 16 The formula below is used to calculate the distance travelled by an object. s = + ut at 1 2 2 where: s=distance u=starting speed a=acceleration t=time Work out the distance travelled by an object when a u=0, a=6 and t=5 b u=30, a=−4 and t=10 Tip 1 2 2 at means 1 2 2 × ×a t SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

22 2 Expressions, formulae and equations 2.3 Expanding brackets Key words brackets expand Exercise 2.3 Focus You can use a box method to multiply numbers, like this: 3×14=3×(10+4) × 10 4 3 30 12 3×14=30+12=42 1 Copy and complete the boxes to work out the answers. a 4×18 b 3×21 × 10 8 4 × 20 1 3 4×18= + = 3×21= + = 2 Copy and complete the boxes to show two different ways to multiply 6 by 58. a 6×58=6×(50+8) b 6×58=6×(60−2) × 50 8 6 × 60 −2 6 6×58= + = 6×58= + = 3 Copy and complete the boxes to simplify these expressions. Some have been started for you. a 3(x+5) b 2(x+9) × x 5 3 3x × x 9 2 3(x+5)=3x+ 2(x+9)= + c 5(y−1) d 4(y−8) × y −1 5 −5 × y −8 4 5(y−1)= −5 4(y−8)= − Tip 3×(10+4) can be written as 3(10+4). You use the table to expand the bracket 3(10+4) to get 3×10+3×4. Tip Your answers to a and b should be the same. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

23 2.3 Expanding brackets 8 Expand and simplify each expression. a 6(a+7)+8(a+9) b 8(b+7)+6(5b+6) c 7(c+8)+9(8+7c) d 7(8d+9)−8(d+7) e 6(5+6e)−7(8e+9) f 9(8f+7g)−6(5g−6f) 4 Copy and complete the boxes to simplify these expressions. Some have been started for you. a 3(2x+1) b 5(4x+9) × 2x 1 3 6x × 4x 9 5 3(2x+1)=6x+ 5(4x+9)= + c 2(3y−7) d 5(8y−5) × 3y −7 2 −14 × 8y −5 5 2(3y−7)= −14 5(8y−5)= − 5 Expand the brackets. a 6(a+6) b 5(b+7) c 7(c−8) d 6(d−9) e 5(8+e) f 7(7+f) g 6(6−g) h 5(7−h) Practice 6 Expand the brackets. a 7(8i+9) b 6(8+7j) c 5(6k−7) d 7(8−9l) e 6(9a+8m) f 5(7b+6n) g 7(7c−8x) h 6(9px+8y) 7 Read what Marcus says. If I expand 4(a−7) and 4(7−a) I will get the same answer, as both expressions have exactly the same terms in them. Is Marcus correct? Explain your answer. Tip Part d= 56d+63−8d−56 =… SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

2 Expressions, formulae and equations 24 9 Expand each expression. Three of them have been started for you. a a(a+1)=a×a+a×1=a2+ b b(b−5) c c(3c+6) d e(4e+9) e i(3i+7x)=i×3i+i×7x=3i 2+ f j(3a−7j) g k(3k−6x) h 3m(m+3x) i 3r(3r−x−3)=3r×3r−3r×x−3r×3=9r2− − j 2a(3+2a+b) k 3x(−z−y−x) 10 Here are some expression cards. Sort the cards into groups of equivalent expressions. A 8y(5+6y) B 4y(5y+6y2 ) C 2y(24y+20) D 2y2 (10+12y) E 4(10y+12y2 ) F 4y2 (6y+5) G y2 (20+24y) H y(40+48y) Challenge 11 Write down and then simplify an expression for the area of each rectangle. a 4cm (2x + 1) cm b 2ycm (3y − 2) cm 12 Expand and simplify each expression. a a(a+3)+a(a+4) b b(b+3)+b(4b+5) c c(3c+4)+c(5c+6) d d(3d+4)−d(d+5) e e(3+4e)−e(5e−6) f f(3f+4g)−5f(6f−7g) SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

25 2.3 Expanding brackets 13 This is part of Sofia’s homework. She has made a mistake in every question. Question Expand and simplify each expression. 1. 3(a+5) – 3(3a+5) 2. p(4q+r)+q(2r – 4p) 3. 5b(b+3a)+a(4a+6b) Answer 1. 3(a+5) – 3(3a+5)=3a+15 – 9a – 15=6a+30 2. p(4q+r)+q(2r – 4p)=4pq+pr+2qr – 4pq = 3pr+pq=4p2 qr 3. 5b(b+3a)+a(4a+6b)=5b2+15ab+4a2+6ab =4a2+5b2+11ab a Explain what she has done wrong. b Work out the correct answers. 14 Write down and then simplify an expression for the area of this compound shape. 3xcm (3x + 4) cm 5xcm (2x − 1) cm SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

26 2 Expressions, formulae and equations 15 Fill in the missing numbers and letters in these expressions. Use all the numbers and letters from the cloud. a 4(3x+ )= x+28 b 3x(2x− )=6 −3x c 6( −3)=30x− d x(9− )=45x−5x2 e 2( x+4)+3(4x− )=16x−16 f x(4x+1)− (x−5)=2x2+ x 2.4 Factorising Key words factorisations factorise term Exercise 2.4 Focus When you factorise an expression, you do the opposite to expanding a bracket. Expanding: 3(x+8)=3x+24 Factorising: 3x+24=3(x+8) 1 Expand these brackets. Use the boxes to help if you want to. The first one is done for you. a 2(x+6) b 3(x+5) × x 6 2 2x 12 × x 5 3 2(x+6)=2x+12 3(x+5)= + c 5(y−3) d 4(y−7) × y −3 5 × y −7 4 5(y−3)= − 4(y−7)= − 2 Factorise these expressions. Use your answers to Question 1. The first one is done for you. a 2x+12=2(x+6) b 3x+15= c 5y−15= d 4y−28= 1 2 5 7 8 11 12 18 x 2x 5x x2 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

27 2.4 Factorising 3 Copy and complete these factorisations. All the numbers you will need are in the cloud. a 2x+8=2(x+ ) b 3x+9=3(x+ ) c 5y−25=5(y− ) d 7y−14=7( − ) 4 Expand these brackets. a 3(2x+1)=6x+ b 4(3x+1)= + c 2(5y−1)= − d 6(4y−1)= − 5 Use your answers to Question 4 to factorise these expressions. a 6x+3= b 12x+4= c 10y−2= d 24y−6= Practice 6 Copy and complete these factorisations. All the numbers you will need are in the cloud. a 4x+6=2(2x+ ) b 6x−15=3(2x− ) c 35y+10=5( y+ ) d 28y−63=7( y− ) 7 Factorise each expression. Make sure you use the highest common factor. a 5z+15 b 2y−14 c 20x+4 d 9w−3 e 6v+8 f 14a−21 g 12−6b h 14+21d 8 Each expression on a grey card has been factorised to give an expression on a white card. Match each grey card with the correct white card. A 3x2+15x i 5x(3x+1) B 4x2+12x ii 2x(2x+5) C 4x2+10x iii 3x(x+5) D 15x2+5x iv 4x(x+3) 9 Factorise each expression. a 7m2+m b 5a2−15a c t2+9t d 8h−4h2 e 3y+12y2 f 12y−16y2 g 16e2+8e h 15e+6i 10 Copy and complete these factorisations. a 14cd−7c=7c(2d− ) b 12a+8ab=4a( +2b) c 21g+15gh=3g( + ) d 30w−15tw=15w( − ) 2 3 4 5 2 3 4 5 7 9 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

28 2 Expressions, formulae and equations 11 Copy and complete each factorisation. a 2a+4h+8=2(a+2h+ ) b 5b−25+5j=5(b− +j) c 12tu+16u−20=4(3tu+ −5) d 3e2+4e+ef=e(3e+ + ) e 7k−k2−ak=k( − − ) f 6n2−9n+3mn=3n( − + ) Challenge 12 a Copy and complete this spider diagram. The four expressions around the edge are all equivalent to the expression in the middle. ( + 4x) (12x + ) x( + ) 24x + 32x2 ( + 8x) b Which expression around the edge is the correct fully factorised expression? 13 a Expand and simplify 4(2x+3)+5(x−4)+3(5−2x) b Factorise your answer to part a. 14 Read what Zara says. Show that Zara is wrong. Explain the mistake she has made. 15 Awen expands an expression, collects like terms and factorises the result. Work out the missing terms. 2a( +4)−4(a2+ )+6a(a−8)=8(a2− −2) 16 The diagram shows a rectangle. The area of the rectangle is 12b2−30b Write an expression for a the length of the rectangle b the perimeter of the rectangle. length 6b A When I expand 5(3x−2)−5(2+x), then collect like terms and finally factorise the result, I get the expression 20(x−1). SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

29 2.5 Constructing and solving equations 2.5 Constructing and solving equations Worked example 2.1 You can use a flow chart like this to solve an equation. Solve 3x + 5 = 17 Answer 3x+5=17 So x=4 Reverse the flow chart to work out the value of x. 4 12 17 17 –5 x ×3 +5 ÷3 Exercise 2.5 Focus 1 Write if each of the following is a formula, an expression or an equation. a ab+7c b m=2b−3g2 c 8(x−8) d 2x+5=13 Key words solve variable Remember that: Examples A formula is a rule that shows the relationship between two or more quantities (variables). It must have an equals sign. F=ma v=u+10t An expression is a statement that involves one or more variables, but does not have an equals sign. 3x−7 a2+2b An equation contains an unknown number, it must have an equals sign, and it can be solved to find the value of the unknown number. 3x−7=14 4=6y+22 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

30 2 Expressions, formulae and equations 2 Complete these flow charts to work out the value of x. a 2x+1=11 x= 10 11 11 – 1 x × 2 + 1 ÷ 2 b 5x−2=18 x= 18 18 + 2 x × 5 – 2 ÷ 5 c 3(x+4)=21 x= 21 21 ÷ 3 x + 4 × 3 – 4 d x 4 − =1 5 x= 5 x ÷ 4 – 1 5 3 The diagram shows a rectangle. +5 y 2 3x + 2 26 15 Complete the workings to find the values of x and y. 3x+2=26 x= y 2 + = 5 15 y= Tips The lengths of the rectangle are the same, so 3x+2=26. The widths of the rectangle are the same, so y 2 + = 5 15. 26 26 – 2 x × 3 + 2 ÷ 3 15 15 – 5 y ÷ 2 + 5 × 2 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

31 2.5 Constructing and solving equations 4 The diagram shows a rectangle. Complete the workings to find the values of x and y. 4(x+2)=40 x= 6(y+3)=30 y= Sometimes, you may have to solve an equation that has the same letter on both sides of the=sign. 6(y + 3) 40 30 4(x + 2) 40 40 ÷ 4 x + 2 × 4 – 2 Tips The lengths of the rectangle are the same, so 4(x+2)=40. The widths of the rectangle are the same, so 6(y+3)=30. 30 y + 3 × 6 30 Worked example 2.2 Solve 5x+8=3x+20 Answer Subtract 3x from both sides: 5x−3x+8=3x−3x+20 2x+8=20 Subtracting 3x from both sides leaves no x on the right. Then use a flow chart to solve 2x+8=20 x=6 6 12 20 20 – 8 x × 2 + 8 ÷ 2 5 Complete the workings to simplify these equations. Then solve the equations by drawing a flow chart. a 4x+5=x+17 Subtract x from both sides: 4x−x+5=x−x+17 3x+ = b 7x+2=2x+27 Subtract 2x from both sides: 7x−2x+2=2x−2x+27 x+ = c 10x−4=8x+12 Subtract 8x from both sides: 10x−8x−4=8x−8x+12 SAMPLE x− = We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

32 2 Expressions, formulae and equations Practice 6 For each of these students i Write an equation to represent what they say. ii Solve your equation to find the value of x. The first one is started for you. a b c x 2+1=20 x 2+1 – 1=20 – 1 x 2= x= × 2 x= My sister is 20 years old. My Dad is x years old. Half of my Dad’s age plus 1 is the same as my sister’s age. How old is my Dad? My brother is 9 years old. My Mum is x years old. One third of my Mum’s age minus 2 is the same as my brother’s age. How old is my Mum? My friend is 16 years old. My Gran is x years old. One quarter of my Gran’s age minus 8 is the same as my friend’s age. How old is my Gran? 7 Work out the value of the algebraic unknown in each isosceles triangle. All measurements are in centimetres. Show how you can check your answers are correct. a 3a − 4 20 b − 4 b 2 21 c c + 18 5c − 6 d SAMPLE 2(d + 1) d + 10 We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

33 2.5 Constructing and solving equations 8 Work out the value of x in each isosceles trapezium. All measurements are in centimetres. Show how you can check your answers are correct. a 7(x – 2) 3x + 6 b 3x + 6 6(x – 1) c 2(x + 6) 9(x – 1) 9 Work out the value of the letters in each diagram. All measurements are in centimetres. a 17 8 10c − 3 − 2 d 5 b 63 45 + 58 f 10 5(e + 2) c 3i + 5 6j + 1 5j + 5 2i + 10 10 For each part of this question i Write an equation to represent the problem. ii Solve the equation. a Arti thinks of a number. He divides it by 2 then subtracts 9. The answer is 5. What number did Arti think of? b Han thinks of a number. She multiplies it by 4 then subtracts 1. The answer is the same as 3 times the number plus 6. What number did Han think of? c Danni thinks of a number. She subtracts 2 then multiplies the result by 8. The answer is the same as subtracting 5 from the number then multiplying by 16. What number did Danni think of? Challenge 11 The total area of this rectangle is 52 cm2 . a Write an equation to represent the problem. b Solve the equation to work out the value of y. c Show how you can check your answer is correct. 7cm 4cm SAMPLE 2y cm We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

34 2 Expressions, formulae and equations 12 A square has a side length of 7 cm. A rectangle has a length of y 8 −3cm and a width of 4 cm. The square has the same perimeter as the rectangle. Work out the value of y. Show all your working. 13 a Complete the workings to solve this equation. x+4 6 =3 x+4=3 × 6 x+4=18 x= b Solve these equations. i x + = − 2 7 4 ii 3 1 2 7 x − = 14 Solve these equations. a 4 5 y = 32 b 5 7 z − =3 7 c 2(5n−4)=12 d 4 3 20 2 3 m− =       15 Here is a secret code box. 8 11 8 3 7 4 5 2 9 Solve each equation below. Use your answers to fill in the letters in the code box to find the name of a Winter Olympic sport. L 4(x−5)=8 G 2(2x+3)+5x=24 H 2(x+3)=3x−3 E 12+3(x+4)=36 O x − 5 6 =1 S 30=6(2x−1) I 5x SAMPLE +3−2x−1=17 B 2(x−5)=3(2x−14) We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

35 2.6 Inequalities 2.6 Inequalities Key word inequality Exercise 2.6 Focus Remember: < means ‘is less than’ ⩽ means ‘is less than or equal to’ > means ‘is greater than’ ⩾ means ‘is greater than or equal to’ 1 Write True (T) or False (F) for each statement. Part a is done for you. a 4 < x < 9 means ‘x is greater than 4 and less than 9’ T b 4 ⩽ x < 9 means ‘x is greater than 4 and less than or equal to 9’ c 4 < x ⩽ 9 means ‘x is greater than 4 and less than or equal to 9’ d 4 ⩽ x ⩽ 9 means ‘x is greater than or equal to 4 and less than 9’ 2 Match each inequality with the correct meaning. The first one is done for you: A and iii A 0 ⩽ x ⩽ 5 i x is greater than or equal to 0 and less than 5 B 0 ⩽ x < 5 ii x is greater than 0 and less than or equal to 5 C 0 < x < 5 iii x is greater than or equal to 0 and less than or equal to 5 D 0 < x ⩽ 5 iv x is greater than 0 and less than 5 3 Write each statement as an inequality. Part a is done for you. a x is greater than or equal to 8 and less than 12 8 ⩽ x < 12 b y is greater than 1 and less than 7 c m is greater than or equal to 0 and less than or equal to 5 d n is greater than 0 and less than or equal to 5 4 Write in words what each inequality means. Part a is done for you. a 7 < x ⩽ 15 x is greater than 7 and less than or equal to 15 b 10 < y < 20 c 0 ⩽ x ⩽ 5 d 50 ⩽ SAMPLE y < 100 We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

36 2 Expressions, formulae and equations 5 Match each inequality with the correct number line. Remember that: • an open circle (○) is for the < inequality • a closed circle (●) is for the ⩽ inequality. The first one is done for you: A and iii A 2 ⩽ x < 7 i 87654321 B 2 < x < 7 ii 87654321 C 2 < x ⩽ 7 iii 87654321 D 2 ⩽ x ⩽ 7 iv 87654321 Practice 6 Copy each number line. Show each inequality on its number line. a 5 < x < 9 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 b 12 < x ⩽ 15 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 c −6 < x ⩽ −2 −7 −6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 d −1 ⩽ x ⩽ 4 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 7 Write the inequality shown by each number line. Use the letter x. a 292827262524 b 3635343332313029 c −15 −14 −13 −12 −11 −10 d SAMPLE −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

37 2.6 Inequalities 8 Copy and complete these equivalent inequalities. a x > 4 is equivalent to 2x > b x < 9 is equivalent to x < 63 c y ⩾ 1 is equivalent to y+9 ⩾ d y ⩽ 1 is equivalent to y−5 ⩽ 9 This is part of Lori’s homework. Question Use the inequality –3 < x < 3 to write i the smallest integer x could be ii the largest integer x could be iii a list of the integer values x could be. Answer i smallest integer is –3 ii largest integer is 3 iii x could be –3, –2, –1, 0, 1, 2, 3 Explain the mistakes Lori has made and write the correct solutions. Make sure you correct all of Lori’s mistakes. 10 For each inequality, write i the smallest integer y could be ii the largest integer y could be iii a list of the integer values y could be. a 32 < y < 38 b 24 < y ⩽ 27 c 40 ⩽ y < 44 d −12 ⩽ y ⩽ −9 11 Write true (T) or false (F) for each statement. The first one is done for you. a 8 > y > 2 means the same as 2 < y < 8 T b 10 > y ⩾ 0 means the same as 0 ⩽ y < 10 c 1 ⩾ y ⩾ −4 means the same as 1 ⩽ y ⩽ −4 d 3 ⩾ y SAMPLE > −3 means the same as −3 ⩽ y < 3 We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

38 2 Expressions, formulae and equations Challenge 12 This is part of Raj’s homework. Question a Show the inequality 5 1 5 < n ⩽ 8 3 4 on a number line. b Write i the smallest integer n could be ii the greatest integer n could be iii a list of the integer values n could be. Answer a 5 6 7 8 9 b i smallest integer is 5 ii largest integer is 9 iii n could be 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 a Raj has made three mistakes. What are the mistakes he has made? b For each inequality, write i the smallest integer n could be ii the greatest integer n could be iii a list of the integer values n could be. A 6 1 3 ⩽ n<10 4 5 B −7 3 8 <n⩽ −37 9 13 Match each inequality with: a the correct smallest integer b the correct largest integer c the correct list of integers. Inequality Smallest integer Largest integer List of integers A 1.9 ⩽ x ⩽ 5.5 i 0 P 5 W 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 B 0.2 < x < 6.1 ii 2 Q 7 X 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 C −0.5 < x ⩽ 4.9 iii 3 R 6 Y 2, 3, 4, 5 D 2.95 ⩽ x < 7.85 iv 1 S 4 Z 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

2.6 Inequalities 39 14 Copy each number line. Show each inequality on its number line. a 0.75 < x ⩽ 3.25 b 10.6 ⩽ x < 13.4 43210 1413121110 15 Write the inequality shown by each number line. Use the letter y. a 2625242322 b 43210 16 Arun and Marcus are discussing inequalities. Read what they say. Write each pair of inequalities as one inequality using i Arun’s method ii Marcus’s method. a y < 18 and y > 12 b y ⩽ 4 and y ⩾ 0 c x > 7 and x ⩽ 25 d x ⩾ 10 and x < 38 The inequalities y ⩽ 14 and y > 2 can be written together as 2 < y ⩽ 14. The inequalities y ⩽ 14 and y > 2 can be written together as 14 ⩾ y > 2. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

40 Key words decimal places inverse operation 3.1 Multiplying and dividing by 0.1 and 0.01 3 Place value and rounding Exercise 3.1 Focus Look at the rule in this cloud. 1 Copy and complete the workings. a 20×0.1=20÷10= b 70×0.1=70÷ = c 80×0.1=80÷ = d 75×0.1=75÷ = 2 Copy and complete the workings. a 300×0.01=300÷100= b 500×0.01=500÷ = c 800×0.01=800÷ = d 650×0.01=650÷ = ×0.1 is the same as ÷10 e.g. 60×0.1=60÷10=6 ×0.01 is the same as ÷100 e.g. 600×0.01=600÷100=6 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

41 3.1 Multiplying and dividing by 0.1 and 0.01 3 Work out these. All the answers are in the rectangle. a 120×0.1 b 12×0.1 c 12 000×0.01 d 12×0.01 4 Copy and complete the workings. a 4÷0.1=4×10= b 7÷0.1=7× = c 20÷0.1=20× = d 25÷0.1=25× = 5 Copy and complete the workings. a 2÷0.01=2×100= b 5÷0.01=5× = c 30÷0.01=30× = d 12÷0.01=12× = 6 Work out these. All the answers are in the rectangle. a 16÷0.1 b 0.16÷0.1 c 0.16÷0.01 d 16÷0.01 0.12 1.2 12 120 ÷0.1 is the same as ×10 e.g. 6÷0.1=6×10=60 ÷0.01 is the same as ×100 e.g. 6÷0.01=6×100=600 1.6 16 160 1600 Practice 7 Work out a 33×0.1 b 999×0.1 c 30×0.1 d 8.7×0.1 e 77×0.01 f 70×0.01 g 700×0.01 h 7×0.01 8 Work out a 5÷0.1 b 5.6÷0.1 c 55.6÷0.1 d 0.55÷0.1 e 5÷0.01 f 5.6÷0.01 g 55.6÷0.01 h 0.55÷0.01 9 Work out the answers to these questions. Use inverse operations to check your answers. a 27×0.1 b 27.9×0.01 c 0.2÷0.1 d 2.7÷0.01 10 Which symbol,×or ÷, goes in each box? a 55 0.1=550 b 46 0.01=0.46 c 3.7 0.1=37 d 208 0.01=2.08 e 0.19 0.1=1.9 f 505 0.01=5.05 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

42 3 Place value and rounding 11 What goes in the box, 0.1 or 0.01? a 44× =4.4 b 4.4÷ =44 c 0.40× =0.004 d 4÷ =40 e 44.4× =0.444 f 44÷ =4400 12 Which calculation, A, B, C or D, gives a different answer to the other three? Show your working. A 0.096÷0.1 B 96×0.01 C 9.6×0.1 D 96÷0.01 Challenge 13 A tiler works out the area of the wall he is going to tile. The tiler uses this formula to work out the extra area of tiles he must order due to wastage. E=0.1A where: E is the extra area A is the area of the wall The diagram shows the dimensions of the wall he is going to tile. 0.6 m 2 m a Work out the extra area of tiles he must order due to wastage. The tiler gets a small discount on the cost of the tiles. He uses this formula to work out the discount. D=0.01C where: D is the discount C is the cost of the tiles b Work out the discount when the cost of the tiles is $195. 14 The diagram shows a triangle of height 0.1m. The area of the triangle is 1.16m2 . The formula for the area of a triangle is A bh = 1 2 a Rearrange the formula to make b the subject. b Use your formula to work out the base length of the triangle. 15 Alicia thinks of a number. Alicia divides her number by 0.01, and then multiplies the answer by 0.1. Alicia then divides this answer by 0.01 and gets a final answer of 2340. What number does Alicia think of first? Explain how you worked out your answer. Tip Wastage is the pieces of tiles that cannot be used because they are broken or the wrong size after cutting. 0.1 m base SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

43 3.2 Rounding Key words accurate degree of accuracy round significant figures (s.f.) 3.2 Rounding Exercise 3.2 Focus Erin uses this method to round 35680 to 1 significant figure. Draw a line after the first s.f. and circle the next digit 3 | 5 6 8 0 The circled digit is a 5, so round the 3 up to 4 and replace all the other digits with zeros. 4 0 0 0 0 So 35 680 rounded to 1 s.f. is 40 000. 1 Use Erin’s method to round each number to 1 significant figure. a 213 b 4823 c 23 850 d 185 255 2 Round each number to 2 significant figures. a 213 b 4823 c 23 850 d 185 255 Tip Draw a line after the second s.f. and circle the next digit. 16 This is part of Ceri’s homework. Question ‘When you multiply a number with one decimal place by 0.01 you will always get an answer smaller than zero.’ Write one example to show this statement is not true. Answer 345.8 × 0.01=3.458 and 3.458 is not smaller than zero so the statement is not true. For each of these statements, write one example to show the statement is not true. a When you divide a number with one decimal place by 0.1 you will always get an answer bigger than 1. b When you multiply a number with two decimal places by 0.01 you will always get an answer greater than 0.01 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

44 3 Place value and rounding 3 Round each number to 3 significant figures. a 4729 b 66 549 c 2 355 244 Paolo uses this method to round 0.002 432 to 1 significant figure. Draw a line after the first s.f. and circle the next digit. 0.002 | |4 3 2 The circled digit is a 4, so leave the 2 as it is. Do not write the 4, 3 or 2 but remember to write all the zeros before the 2. 0.002 So 0.002 432 rounded to 1 s.f. is 0.002. 4 Use Paolo’s method to round each number to 1 significant figure. a 0.0231 b 0.005671 c 0.0000381 d 0.688 5 Round each number to 2 significant figures. a 0.0231 b 0.005671 c 0.0000381 d 0.688 Practice 6 Round each number to one significant figure (1 s.f.). Choose the correct answer: A, B or C. a 468 A 5 B 50 C 500 b 9.02 A 10 B 9 C 0.9 c 5686 A 6000 B 5000 C 6 d 0.0035 A 4 B 0.04 C 0.004 7 Round each number to two significant figures (2 s.f.). All the answers are in the circle. a 358 b 0.361 c 3572 d 0.0035601 e 35.99 f 3.6009 8 This is part of Li’s homework. Question Round each number to 3 s.f. a 2 374 650 b 0.002 058 84 Answer a 237 b 0.002 Tip Draw a line after the third s.f. and circle the next digit. 0.0036 0.36 3.6 36 360 3600 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

45 3.2 Rounding Li has rounded one large number and one small number to three significant figures. Both answers are wrong. a Explain the mistakes Li has made. b Write the correct answers. 9 Round each number to the given number of significant figures (s.f.). a 2468.15 (1 s.f.) b 759.233 (2 s.f.) c 5.3691 (3 s.f.) d 0.0781 (1 s.f.) e 0.1954 (2 s.f.) f 6.03888 (3 s.f.) g 964 (1 s.f.) h 0.899 (2 s.f.) i 19.985 (3 s.f.) 10 Which is the correct answer in each case, A, B, C or D? a 567 rounded to 1 s.f. A 5 B 6 C 500 D 600 b 15.493 rounded to 2 s.f. A 15 B 16 C 15.49 D 15.50 c 0.078 87 rounded to 3 s.f. A 0.078 B 0.079 C 0.0789 D 0.0790 d 0.007 77777 rounded to 4 s.f. A 0.0077 B 0.0078 C 0.007 777 D 0.007778 e 0.039 63 rounded to 2 s.f. A 0.040 B 0.04 C 0.4 D 0.030 11 a Use a calculator to work out the answer to 24 2 83 7 2 . × Write all the numbers on your calculator display. b Round your answer to part a to the stated number of significant figures (s.f.). i 1 s.f. ii 2 s.f. iii 3 s.f. iv 4 s.f. v 5 s.f. vi 6 s.f. 12 Gina drove from her house in Madrid to a friend’s house in Paris, a distance of 1275.3km. Gina then drove to another friend’s house in Rome, a distance of 1445.2km. How far did Gina drive altogether? Give your answer correct to two significant figures (2 s.f.). 13 Round the number 530.403 977 to the stated number of significant figures (s.f.). a 1 s.f. b 2 s.f. c 3 s.f. d 4 s.f. SAMPLE e 5 s.f. f 6 s.f. We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

3 Place value and rounding Challenge 14 The instructions on a packet of rice say you should cook 75 g per person. Yuang carefully weighed out 75 g of rice. He counted the grains and found he had 2896 grains of rice. Work out the average (mean) mass of a single grain of rice. Give your answer correct to three significant figures (3 s.f.). 15 Gerry’s electric toothbrush rotates the brush 125 times per second. Gerry brushes her teeth for two minutes, twice a day. How many rotations does her electric toothbrush make in one week? Give your answer correct to one significant figure (1 s.f.). 16 A football club sells, on average, 23 000 tickets per match. In one season they play, on average, 46 matches. How many tickets do they sell, on average, each season? Round your answer to an appropriate degree of accuracy. 17 This formula is often used in science. v=u+at Work out the value of a when v=5.2, u=1.4 and t=72. Round your answer to an appropriate degree of accuracy. 18 Complete these steps for each calculation. i Work out an estimate of the answer by rounding each number to one significant figure. ii Use a calculator to work out the accurate answer. Give this answer correct to three significant figures (3 s.f.). iii Compare your estimate with the accurate answer to decide if your accurate answer is correct. a 0.6292×189.3 b 782.5÷1.95 c 21.4×590 d 0.7951 206 1.96 × e 9732 3176 6.816 − f 48.22 9.81 20.05 + g 158.2 0.1956 43.5 × h 2.104 11.795 7.887 3.109 × − i 78 500 .02 0.235 88 × × 0 3 Tip Change the subject of the formula first. 46 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

47 Key words compare decimal number order 4.1 Ordering decimals 4 Decimals Exercise 4.1 Focus 1 Complete the workings to write these numbers in order of size, starting with the smallest. 5.51 5.08 5.21 5.17 All the numbers have the same whole number part, so you only need to compare the decimal parts. Step 1: Write the decimal parts only: 51, 08, 21, 17 Step 2: Now write in order the decimal parts only: 08, 17, , Step 3: Now write the complete numbers in order: 5.08, , , 2 Use the same method as in Question 1 to write these decimal numbers in order of size, starting with the smallest. a 4.29, 4.16, 4.95, 4.91 Write the decimal parts only: Write in order the decimal parts only: Write the complete numbers in order: b 8.94, 8.49, 8.95, 8.47 Write the decimal parts only: Write in order the decimal parts only: Write the complete numbers in order: c 0.19, 0.15, 0.13, 0.01 Write the decimal parts only: Write in order the decimal parts only: Write the complete numbers in order: SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

48 4 Decimals 3 Write the correct sign, < or >, between each pair of numbers. a 7.27 7.23 b 9.71 9.83 c 20.17 20.09 d 3.9 3.65 4 Write the correct sign, < or >, between each pair of numbers. Use the number line to help you. a −5.2 −5.7 b −6.5 −6.2 c −7.2 −7.5 d −8.8 −8.9 5 Write the correct sign, < or >, between each pair of measurements. Copy and complete the working. a 3.5g 380mg 3.5 g=3.5×1000=3500mg 3500mg 380mg b 0.4t 845kg 0.4 t=0.4×1000= kg kg 845kg c 2.5cm 48mm 2.5cm=2.5×10= mm mm 48mm d 950g 0.08kg 0.08kg=0.08×1000= g 950g g e 2500m 1.9km 1.9km=1.9×1000= m 2500m m f 250cm 6.5m 6.5m=6.5×100= cm 250 cm cm Practice 6 Write the decimal numbers in each set in order of size, starting with the smallest. a 45.454, 45.545, 45.399, 45.933 b 5.183, 5.077, 5.044, 5.009 c 31.425, 31.148, 31.41, 31.14 d 7.502, 7.052, 7.02, 7.2 7 Write the correct sign,=or ≠, between each pair of measurements. a 205.5cm 255mm b 0.125 g 125mg c 500g 0.05kg d 10.5t 1050kg e 0.22kg 220g f 1.75km 175m 8 Write the correct sign, < or >, between each pair of numbers. a 9.1 9.03 b 56.4 56.35 c 0.66 0.606 d 3.505 3.7 e 0.77t 806kg f 7800m 0.8km g 3.5kg 375g h 156.3cm 1234mm Tip In each part, the whole numbers are the same. So you only need to compare the decimal parts. In Q3a, 27 > 23 so 7.27 > 7.23. –9 –8 –7 –6 –5 a –5.7 –5.2 Tip Start by converting one of the measurements so that both measurements are SAMPLE in the same units. We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

  

49 4.1 Ordering decimals 9 Write the measurements in each set in order of size, starting with the smallest. a 4.3 cm, 27mm, 0.2 cm, 7mm b 34.5 cm, 500mm, 29 cm, 19.5mm c 2000 g, 75.75kg, 5550 g, 3kg d 1.75kg, 1975g, 0.9kg, 1800g e 0.125 g, 100mg, 0.2 g, 150mg f 25km, 2750m, 0.05km, 999m 10 Write the correct sign, < or >, between each pair of numbers. a −2.3 −2.4 b −7.23 −7.29 c −0.15 −0.08 d −11.02 −11.5 11 Write these decimal numbers in order of size, starting with the smallest. a −8.34, −8.06, −8.28, −8.8 b −1.425, −1.78, −1.03, −1.5 Challenge 12 Frank and Sarina run around a park every day. They keep a record of the distances they run each day for 10 days. These are the distances Frank runs each day. 400m 2.4km 0.8km 3200m 32km 1.2km 1.6km 2000m 3.6km 1200m a Which distance do you think Frank has written down incorrectly? Explain your answer. These are the distances Sarina runs each day. 2km 4000m 0.75km 3.5km 1000m 3000m 1.25km 0.5km 3250m 1.75km b Sarina says the longest distance she ran is almost ten times the shortest distance she ran. Is Sarina correct? Explain your answer. Frank and Sarina run in different parks. The distance round one of the parks is 250m. The distance round the other park is 400m. Frank and Sarina always run a whole number of times around their park. c Who do you think runs in each park? Explain how you made your decision. Tip Make sure all the measurements are in the same units before you start to order them. Tip Draw a number line to help if you want to. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.