100 8 Shapes and symmetry Challenge 12 Put each quadrilateral through this classification flow chart. Write the letter where each shape comes out. a rhombus b trapezium c kite d rectangle e square f isosceles trapezium g parallelogram All angles are 90º? START All sides the same length? Two pairs of equal angles? All sides the same length? One pair of parallel sides? K no no yes yes yes Opposite angles are equal? no no no no yes yes yes M N H J L I SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

101 8.1 Quadrilaterals and polygons 13 This diagram shows the hierarchy of quadrilaterals. In the diagram, a quadrilateral below another is a special case of the one above it. For example, a square is a special rectangle but a rectangle is not a square. Use the diagram to decide if each statement is true (T) or false (F). a A rhombus is a special parallelogram b A kite is a special quadrilateral c A trapezium is a special parallelogram d A rectangle is a special rhombus e A kite is a special parallelogram f A square is a special rhombus. 14 Make a copy of the coordinate grid shown. 10 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 10 y 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10x 9 8 On the grid, plot the following points: (2, 2) (6, 2) (0, 4) (4, 4) (8, 4) (2, 6) (2, 8) (6, 8) (4, 9) Which four points can you join to make each of these quadrilaterals? a rectangle b square c parallelogram d kite e trapezium Quadrilateral Trapezium Isosceles Trapezium Rectangle Parallelogram Square Rhombus Kite SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

102 8 Shapes and symmetry Key words circumference diameter pi (π) radius semicircle 8.2 The circumference of a circle The formula for the circumference of a circle is C=pd where: C is the circumference of the circle d is the diameter of the circle. Tip Remember: C=pd means C=p×d Exercise 8.2 Focus 1 Copy and complete the workings to find the circumference of each circle. Use pi=3.14 Round each answer correct to 1 decimal place (1 d.p.). a 4 cm b 5 cm 2 Copy and complete the workings to find the circumference of each circle. Use π=3.142 Round each answer correct to 2 decimal places (2 d.p.). a 8 cm b 6 cm 3 Copy and complete the workings to find the circumference of each circle. Use the π button on your calculator. Round each answer correct to 2 decimal places (2 d.p.). a 9 cm b 12 cm d C d = = = = 4cm cm π 3 1. 4 4 × d C d = = = × = 5 3 14 5 cm cm π . d C d = = = × = 8 cm cm π 3 142 . 8 d C d = = = × = 6 cm cm π 3 142 6. d C d = = = × = 9 cm cm π π 9 d C d = = = × = 12 cm cm π SAMPLE π 12 We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

103 8.2 The circumference of a circle 4 Copy and complete the workings to find the circumference of each circle. Use π=3.14 a 5 cm b 1 cm radius, r=5cm radius, r=1cm diameter, d=2×5= cm diameter, d=2×1= cm C d = = × = π 3 1. 4 10 cm C d = = × = π 3 1. 4 2 cm Practice For the rest of the questions in this exercise, use the π button on your calculator. 5 Work out the circumference of each circle. Round each answer correct to 2 decimal places (2 d.p.). a diameter=16cm b diameter=9.5m c radius=10cm d radius=2.8m 6 Work out the diameter of a circle with a circumference=35cm b circumference=8.95m. Round each answer correct to 1 decimal place (1 d.p.). 7 Work out the radius of a circle with a circumference=23cm b circumference=17.8m. Round each answer correct to 2 decimal places (2 d.p.). 8 The circumference of a circular coin is 56mm. Work out the diameter of the coin. Give your answer correct to the nearest millimetre. 9 A circular pond has a circumference of 10.45m. Show that the radius of the pond is 166cm correct to the nearest centimetre. Challenge 10 Work out the perimeter of this semicircle. Round your answer correct to 2 decimal places (2 d.p.). Tip Remember, you can rearrange C=pd to give d= C p Tip Remember, you can rearrange C=2pr to give r= C 2p SAMPLE 24 cm We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

104 8 Shapes and symmetry 11 The diagram shows a semicircle and three-quarters of a circle. 8 cm 3 m Is Marcus correct? Show working to support your answer. 12 Work out the perimeter of each compound shape. Give your answers correct to two decimal places (2 d.p.). a 8.4 cm 12.6 cm b 6 cm 13 The diagram shows an athletics track. The radius of the inner semicircle at each end is 36.8m. The length of the straight section is 84.39m. a Work out the length of the inner perimeter of the track. Give your answer correct to the nearest metre. b The width of each lane is 1.22m. There are eight lanes. Work out the radius of the outer semicircle at each end of the track. c Work out the length of the outer perimeter of the track. Give your answer correct to the nearest metre. 84.39 m 36.8 m inner perimeter outer perimeter I think the perimeter of the semicircle is less than the perimeter of the threequarter circle shape. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

105 8.3 3D shapes Exercise 8.3 Focus 1 a The diagram shows a pentagonal prism. Write the number of faces, vertices and edges for this prism. b The formula linking the number of faces (F), vertices (V) and edges (E) for a 3D shape with no curved surfaces is E=F + V–2 Substitute your values for F and V (from part a) into the formula to check your value for E. c Use the formula to work out the number of edges of a shape with 8 faces and 12 vertices. d Use the formula to work out the number of vertices of a shape with 11 faces and 20 edges. 2 The diagram shows a cuboid. The top view, front view and side view of the cuboid are drawn on centimetre squared paper. The scale used is 1 :6. a Copy and complete the workings to find the dimensions of the scale drawing. 30÷6=5cm 24÷6= cm 12÷6= cm b Match each drawing with the correct view. A Top view B Front view C Side view i ii iii Tip Start by rearranging the formula E=F + V–2 to get V= 12 cm 30 cm 24 cm 8.3 3D shapes Key words front view, front elevation side view, side elevation top view, plan view SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

106 8 Shapes and symmetry 3 Copy and complete the workings and scale drawings for this question. Draw the top view, front view and side view of each shape. Use a scale of 1 :2 a cube 8 cm Dimensions for the drawing: 8÷2= cm Top view Front view Side view Tip Draw a square of side length 4 cm. Tip Draw a square of side length 4 cm. Tip Draw a square of side length 4 cm. b cuboid 12 cm 10 cm 6 cm Dimensions for the drawing: 6÷2= cm 10÷2= cm 12÷2= cm Top view Front view Side view Tip Draw a rectangle 6cm by 5cm. Tip Draw a rectangle cm by cm. Tip Draw a rectangle  cm by cm. c cylinder 11 cm 16 cm 8 cm Dimensions for the drawing: 8÷2= cm 11÷2= cm 16÷2= cm Top view Front view Side view Tip Draw a circle radius 4cm. Tip Draw a rectangle cm by cm. Tip Draw a rectangle SAMPLE cm by cm. We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

107 8.3 3D shapes 4 The diagram shows a 3D shape. 4 cm 2 cm 2 cm 2 cm 1 cm 3 cm The plan view, front elevation and side elevations are drawn on centimetre squared paper. Write if A, B or C is the correct scale drawing for each view. The scale used is 1 :1. a plan view A B C b front elevation A B C c side elevation from the left A B C d side elevation from the right A B C Tip Remember, the plan view is the same as the top view and the side elevation is the same as the side view. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

108 8 Shapes and symmetry 5 The diagram shows the dimensions of a shipping container. Abbie makes a house from three shipping containers. The containers are arranged as shown in the diagram. Draw the plan view, the front elevation and the side elevation of her house. Use a scale of 1 :120 6 Draw the plan view, the front elevation and the side elevation of this 3D shape. Use a scale of 1 :4 16 cm 12 cm 8 cm 32 cm 8 cm 20 cm 7 Draw the plan view, the front elevation and the side elevation of this right-angled triangular prism. Use a scale of 1 :5 15 cm 20 cm 25 cm 35 cm 8 Draw the plan view, the front elevation and the side elevation of this isosceles triangular prism. Use a scale of 1 :20 100 cm 120 cm 80 cm 6 m 2.4 m 2.4 m Tip Change the dimensions of the shipping container into centimetres before using the scale. Tip If the views from the left side and the right side are the same, you only need to draw one side elevation. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

109 8.3 3D shapes Challenge 9 The diagram shows four shapes drawn on dotty paper. The shapes are made from 1 cm cubes. a P F S b c d Accurately draw the plan view, the front elevation and the side elevation for each shape. Use 1 cm squared paper. The arrows in part a show the directions from which you look at each shape to draw the plan view (P), the front elevation (F) and the side elevation (S). SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

110 8 Shapes and symmetry 10 This is part of Sara’s homework. Question Accurately draw the plan view, front elevation and side elevation of this shape. S F P 60 cm 20 cm 40 cm Use a scale of 1:10. Use 1cm squared paper. Answer The height of the shape is 20 cm, so it is made from 20 cm cubes. Scale is 1:10, so the height of 20 cm needs to be 20÷10=2 cm The length of 60 cm needs to be 60÷10=6 cm The width of 40 cm needs to be 40÷10=4 cm Plan view Side elevation Front elevation Which of Sara’s drawings are incorrect? Explain the mistakes she has made. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

8.3 3D shapes 11 The diagram shows a shape drawn on dotty paper. The shape is made from cubes. The width of the shape is shown in the diagram. Accurately draw the plan view, front elevation and side elevation for this shape. Use a scale of 1 :3. Use 1 cm squared paper. 12 The diagram shows a shape drawn on dotty paper. The shape is made from cubes. The width of the shape is shown in the diagram. Accurately draw the plan view, front elevation and side elevation for this shape. Use a scale of 1 :2. Use 1 cm squared paper. 3 cm F 6 cm 3 cm S P P S F 4 cm 16 cm 4 cm 111 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

112 9.1 Generating sequences 9 Sequences and functions Exercise 9.1 Focus 1 Copy and complete the workings to find the term-to-term rule and the next two terms of each sequence. a 8, 8 1 2 , 9, 9 1 2 ,... 8 8 1 2 1 2 + = , 8 1 2 + =9, 9+ =9 1 2 The term-to-term rule is: add The next two terms are: 9 1 2 + = + = b 8, 8.3, 8.6, 8.9,... 8+0.3=8.3, 8.3+ =8.6, 8.6+ =8.9 The term-to-term rule is: add The next two terms are: 8.9+ = + = c 5 1 3 , 5, 4 2 3 , 4 1 3 ,... 5 5 1 3 1 3 − = , 5– =4 2 3 , 4 4 2 3 1 3 − = The term-to-term rule is: subtract The next two terms are: 4 1 3 – = – = d 9.4, 9, 8.6, 8.2,... 9.4–0.4=9, 9 – =8.6, 8.6 – =8.2 The term-to-term rule is: subtract The next two terms are: 8.2– = – = SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

113 9.1 Generating sequences 2 Match each sequence card with the correct term-to-term rule card. The first one is done for you: A and iii A 5, 7 1 2 , 10, 12 1 2 ,... i subtract 1 1 2 B 10, 8 1 2 , 7, 5 1 2 ,... ii add 2 3 C 8, 8 2 3 , 9 1 3 , 10,... iii add 2 1 2 D 5, 4 1 3 , 3 2 3 , 3,... iv subtract 2 3 3 For each sequence, write i the term-to-term rule ii the next two terms. a 1 1 4 , 1 1 2 , 1 3 4 , 2,... b 9, 10 1 2 , 12, 13 1 2 ,... c 3.2, 3.4, 3.6, 3.8,... d 10, 9 1 2 , 9, 8 1 2 ,... e 15, 14 3 5 , 14 1 5 , 13 4 5 ,... f 17, 16.75, 16.5, 16.25,... 4 Write the first three terms of each sequence. The first one has been done for you. First term Term-to-term rule First three terms a 2 Add 0.8 2, 2.8, 3.6 b 3 Add 3 1 2 c 10 Subtract 1.2 d 30 Subtract 2 1 5 e 0.3 Multiply by 2 f 18 Divide by 2 5 In this sequence, some of the terms are missing. 2, 3 1 3 , , 6, , 8 2 3 , , a Write the term-to-term rule. b Use the term-to-term rule to work out the missing terms. Tip Use the first two terms to work out the term-toSAMPLE term rule. We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

114 9 Sequences and functions Practice 6 Copy these finite sequences and fill in the missing terms. a 6, 7 1 5 , , 9 3 5 , ,12, b 2, 5 1 4 , 8 1 2 , , , 18 1 4 , c 20 3 4 , 20 1 2 , , , 193 4 , , 19 1 4 d 40, 39 4 7 , , 38 5 7 , , 37 6 7 , e 7, , , 11.2, 12.6, , f , , 19, 18.3, , 16.9 7 a In the sequence 1.3, 1.8, 2.3, 2.8,... what is the first term greater than 15? b Is 100 a term in the sequence 10 1 5 , 20 2 5 , 30 3 5 ,...? Explain your answer. c Is 4 1 2 a term in the sequence 40, 37 1 3 , 34 2 3 , 32,...? Explain your answer. 8 Write the first three terms in each of these sequences. The first one has been started for you. a first term is 2 term-to-term rule is multiply by 3 then subtract 1 first term=2 second term=2 × 3 – 1=6 – 1=5 third term=5 × 3 – 1= – 1= b first term is 10 term-to-term rule is subtract 4 then multiply by 2 c first term is 6 term-to-term rule is divide by 2 then add 7 9 The first three terms of a sequence are 4, 10, 28,... a Which card, A, B or C, shows the correct term-to-term rule? A multiply by 3 then subtract 2 B divide by 2 then add 8 C subtract 2 then multiply by 5 b Which is the first term in this sequence greater than 700? 10 Work out the first three terms in each sequence. a first term is 5 term-to-term rule is multiply by 2 then subtract 8 b first term is 12 term-to-term rule is subtract 4 1 2 then multiply by 2 c first term is −8 term-to-term rule is add 4 then divide by 2 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

115 9.1 Generating sequences Challenge 11 The first term of a sequence is 22. The term-to-term rule is divide by 2 then subtract 3. Show that the first term in this sequence which is a negative number is −2 1 2 . 12 The first term of a sequence is 6. The term-to-term rule is divide by 2 then add 1. a Work out the first ten terms of the sequence. You can use a calculator to help you. b What do you notice about the terms in your sequence? c What number goes at the end of this sentence? ‘The terms in this sequence are all greater than .’ Explain why this happens. 13 This is part of Sian’s homework. Question The 10th term of a sequence is 24 3 8 . The term-to-term rule is add 2 5 8 . What is the 5th term of the sequence? Answer 5th term=10th term÷2=24 3 8 ÷2=12 3 16 a Explain why Sian’s method is wrong. b Work out the correct answer. Show all your working. 14 The 5th term of a sequence is 489. The term-to-term rule is subtract 2 then multiply by 3. What is the 3rd term of the sequence? Show all your working. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

116 9 Sequences and functions 15 The answers to the calculations on these cards are the first three terms of a sequence. 20% of 42 3 5 ×21 0.56×30 a What is the term-to-term rule for the sequence? b What is the 10th term in the sequence? This card is the calculation for the 10th term in the sequence. 4× +7.8 c What is the missing number on the card? Show all your working. Key words position number position-to-term rule sequence of patterns 9.2 Finding rules for sequences Exercise 9.2 Focus 1 This sequence of patterns is made from grey triangles. Pattern 1 Pattern 2 Pattern 3 a Write the sequence of the numbers of grey triangles. b Write the term-to-term rule. c Draw the next pattern in the sequence. d Copy and complete the table to find the position-to-term rule. position number 1 2 3 4 term 3 5 2×position number 2 4 2×position number+ Position-to-term rule is: term SAMPLE =2×position number+ We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

117 9.2 Finding rules for sequences 2 This pattern is made from squares. Pattern 1 Pattern 2 Pattern 3 a Write the sequence of the numbers of squares. b Write the term-to-term rule. c Draw the next pattern in the sequence. d Copy and complete the table to find the position-to-term rule. position number 1 2 3 4 term 5 8 3×position number 3 6 3×position number+ Position-to-term rule is: term=3×position number+ 3 This pattern is made from dots. Pattern 1 Pattern 2 Pattern 3 a Write the sequence of the numbers of dots. b Write the term-to-term rule. c Draw the next pattern in the sequence. d Copy and complete the table to find the position-to-term rule. position number 1 2 3 4 term 8 12 4×position number 4 8 4×position number+ Position-to-term rule is: term=4×position number+ 4 This pattern is made from triangles. Pattern 1 Pattern 2 Pattern 3 a Write the sequence of the numbers of triangles. b Write the term-to-term rule. c Draw the next pattern in the sequence. d Copy and complete the table to find the position-to-term rule. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

118 9 Sequences and functions position number 1 2 3 4 term 7 10 3×position number 3 6 3×position number+ Position-to-term rule is: term=3×position number+ Practice 5 This pattern is made from rectangles. Pattern 1 Pattern 2 Pattern 3 a Write the sequence of the numbers of rectangles. b Write the term-to-term rule. c Draw the next pattern in the sequence. d Draw and complete a table like the one in Question 4, to find the position-to-term rule. 6 This pattern is made from grey arrows. Pattern 1 Pattern 2 Pattern 3 a Write the sequence of the numbers of grey arrows. b Write the term-to-term rule. c Draw the next pattern in the sequence. d Draw and complete a table to find the position-to-term rule. 7 This pattern is made from hexagons. Pattern 1 Pattern 2 Pattern 3 Sami thinks the position-to-term rule for the sequence of the numbers of hexagons is: term=5×position number+2 Is Sami correct? Explain the method you used to work out your answer. 8 Work out the position-to-term rule for each sequence. a 7, 12, 17, 22,... b 10, 25, 40, 55,... SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

119 9.2 Finding rules for sequences 9 This is part of Kai’s homework. Question Work out the position-to-term rule for this sequence of octagons. Pattern 1 Pattern 2 Pattern 3 Answer The sequence starts with 3 and increases by 5 every time, so the position-to-term rule is: term=5 × position number+3 a Explain the mistake Kai has made. b Work out the correct answer. Challenge 10 This pattern is made from rhombuses. Pattern 1 Pattern 2 Pattern 3 How many rhombuses will there be in Pattern 25? Show how you worked out your answer. 11 A sequence has position-to-term rule: term=3×position number+1 a Work out the first three terms in this sequence. b Draw a pattern using shapes to show the first three terms in this sequence. Use a shape of your choice. 12 Betty is working out the position-to-term rule for a sequence of numbers. She has drawn a table, but she has spilt juice on her work. position number 1 2 3 4 term 8 …×position number …×position number–6 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

120 9 Sequences and functions a What is the position-to-term rule for her sequence? Explain how you worked out your answer. b Work out the 10th term of the sequence. 13 Anil is using the area of rectangles to make a sequence of numbers. The diagram shows the first three rectangles. 3.5cm 4cm 11 cm 6 cm 2cm 5cm The 8th rectangle in the sequence has a width of 2.5 cm. What is the length of this rectangle? Show how you worked out your answer. Tip Start by working out the area of each of the first three rectangles. Then find the position-to-term rule. 9.3 Using the nth term Key word nth term Exercise 9.3 Focus 1 Copy and complete the workings to find the first four terms of each sequence. a nth term is 4n 1st term=4×1=4 2nd term=4×2= 3rd term=4×3= 4th term=4×4= b nth term is n+12 1st term=1+12=13 2nd term=2+12= 3rd term=3+12= 4th term=4+12= c nth term is 2n–1 1st term=2×1 – 1=1 2nd term=2×2 – 1= 3rd term=2×3–1= 4th term=2×4–1= d nth term is 3n+2 1st term=3× 1+2=5 2nd term=3×2+2= 3rd term=3×3+2= 4th term=3×4+2= 2 Work out the first three terms and the 10th term of the sequences with the given nth term. a 8n b 5n–3 c n+3 d n–7 e 2n+8 f 3n – 2 g 6n+1 h 5n–4 3 Each card shows one term from a different sequence. A 8th term in the sequence, nth term is 2n+14 B 5th term in the sequence, nth term is 7n–4 Which card has the smaller value, A or B? Show your working. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

121 9.3 Using the nth term 4 A sequence has the nth term 1 2 n+3. Show that the first four terms of the sequence are 3 1 2 , 4, 4 1 2 and 5. 5 Work out the first three terms and the 8th term of the sequences with the given nth term. a 1 2 1 2 n +3 b 4n– 1 2 c 6n+1.75 d 2.5n–0.4 Practice 6 a Work out the first four terms of the sequences with the given nth term. A 4n+7 B 15–n C 1 4 n+10 D 20– 1 3 n b In which of the sequences in part a are the terms increasing? c In which of the sequences in part a are the terms decreasing? d Look at the following sequences but do not work out the terms. A 16– 1 8 n B 12n–4 C 34– 3n D 2 5 n+8 Are the terms in each sequence increasing or decreasing? Explain your decisions. 7 Look at this number sequence. 20, 23, 26, 29, 32,... Explain why you can tell – simply by looking at the numbers in the sequence – that the nth term expression for this sequence cannot be 23 – 3n. 8 a The nth term expression for a sequence is 4n+1. Is the number 61 a term in this sequence? b The nth term expression for a sequence is 3n–5. Is the number 48 a term in this sequence? 9 Copy and complete the workings to find the nth term expression for the sequence 8, 11, 14, 17,... position number (n) 1 2 3 4 term 8 11 14 17 3×n 3 6 3×n+ 8 11 14 17 nth term is 3n+ Tip What do you need to add to 3 to get 8? What do you need to add SAMPLE to 6 to get 11? We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

122 9 Sequences and functions 10 Work out an expression for the nth term of each sequence. Draw a table like the one in Question 9 to help you. a 3, 5, 7, 9,... b 10, 13, 16, 19,... c 1, 5, 9, 13,... d 4, 9, 14, 19,... 11 This pattern is made from hexagons. Pattern 1 Pattern 2 Pattern 3 Pattern 4 a Write the sequence of the numbers of hexagons. b Work out an expression for the nth term for the sequence. Draw a table like the one in Question 9 to help you. c Use your nth term expression to find the number of hexagons in the 30th pattern in the sequence. Challenge 12 Work out an expression for the nth term of each sequence. a −15, −10, −5, 0,... b 1 3 5 , 3 3 5 , 5 3 5 , 7 3 5 ,... c 3.3, 8.3, 13.3, 18.3,... 13 Sofia is looking at the number sequence −14, −8, −2, 4,... Read what she says. The 50th term of this sequence is 280 Is Sofia correct? Show all your working. 14 Work out an expression for the nth term of each sequence. a 7, 6, 5, 4,... b 7, 4, 1, −2,... c 7, 0, −7, −14,... 15 Use the nth term expression to work out the 20th term of each sequence in Question SAMPLE 14. We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

123 9.4 Representing simple functions 16 The cards show two different sequences. A −12 1 2 , −10, −7 1 2 , −5,... B 75.75, 71.5, 67.25, 63,... You can see that the first four terms in sequence A are smaller than the first four terms in sequence B. What is the term number of the first term in sequence A that is larger than the equivalent term in sequence B? Show all your working. Tip For example, is it the 20th term, the 50th term or a different term, when A > B? 9.4 Representing simple functions Key words function function machine inverse function inverse function equation mapping diagram two-step function Exercise 9.4 Focus 1 For each of these function machines, copy and complete i the table of values ii the mapping diagram iii the equation. a x +4 y i ii 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 y 0 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 x 1 iii x+4=y, so y=……… x 0 2 3 5 1 2 y 4 Tip When x=0, y=0+4=4 When x=2, y=2+4= When x=3, y=3+4= When x=5 1 2 , y=5 1 2 SAMPLE +4= We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

124 9 Sequences and functions b x ×3 y i ii 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 y 0 x 1 iii x×3=y, so y=……… c x ÷4 y i ii 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 11 12 13 14 15 y 0 x 1 iii x 4 =y, so y=……… 2 For each function machine, copy and complete i the table of values ii the equation. a x ×2 –1 y i ii x×2 – 1=y is written as y=2x– Tip When x=11 2 , y=11 2 ×3=4 1 2 When x=3, y=3×3= When x=4, y=4×3= When x=6, y=6×3= x 1 1 2 3 4 6 y 4 1 2 Tip When x=4, y=4÷4= When x=6, y=6÷4=11 2 When x=8, y=8÷4= When x=14, y=14÷4= x 4 6 8 14 y 1 1 2 Tip When x=2, y=2×2–1=4–1=3 When x=3, y=3×2–1=6–1= x 2 3 4 4 1 2 SAMPLE y 3 We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

125 9.4 Representing simple functions b x ÷2 +1 y i ii x 2 +1=y is written as y= x 2 + c x +3 ÷4 y i ii x + 3 4 =y is written as y=……… d x –5 ×4 y i ii (x– 5)×4=y is written as y=4(………) 3 Copy and complete the table for each function machine. a x +12 y b x ×5 y Tip When x=3, y=3÷2+1=11 2 +1=21 2 When x=6, y=6÷2+1=3+1= x 3 6 8 11 y 2 1 2 x 7 9 13 23 y 2 1 2 x 6 1 2 8 11 13 1 2 y 6 Tip When x=2, y=2+12= Reverse the function machine: When y=20, x=20–12= x 2 5 1 2 y 20 28 Tip When x=1, y=1×5= Reverse the function machine: When y=20, x=20÷5= x 1 3 y 20 35 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

126 9 Sequences and functions c x +1 ÷2 y Practice 4 a Copy and complete the tables for these function machines. i x –9 y ii x ÷6 y x 10 15 1 4 y 9 11 1 3 x 12 39 y 5 12 iii x ÷5 –4 y iv x +8 ×2 y x 30 100 y 0 4 x 2 1 2 7 1 2 y 20 24 b Write each function in part a as an equation. 5 Copy and complete these inverse function machines and equations. a +11 –11 x y x y equation: y=x+11 inverse function equation: x=………… b x ×4 y x y equation: y=4x inverse function equation: x=………… Tip When x=5, y=(5+1)÷2= ÷2= Reverse the function machine: When y=9, y=9×2–1= –1= x 5 12 y 9 15 1 2 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

127 9.4 Representing simple functions c x –17 y x y equation: y=x– 17 inverse function equation: x=………… d x ÷9 y x y equation: y=………… inverse function equation: x=………… e x –1 ×12 y x y equation: y=12(x–1) inverse function equation: x=………… f x ÷3 –10 y x y equation: y=………… inverse function equation: x=………… 6 Match each function equation with the correct inverse function equation. The first one is done for you: A and ii A y=x–4 i x=3y+9 B y= x 12 ii x=y+4 C y= x − 9 3 iii x=5(y–10) D y=6x+1 iv x= y 6 +2 E y= x 5 +10 v x=12y F y=6(x–2) vi x= y −1 6 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

128 9 Sequences and functions 7 a For this function, write i the equation ii the inverse function equation. b Copy and complete this table of values. Use your answers to part a. x −6 −3 y 8 13 1 2 8 a For this function, write i the equation ii the inverse function equation. b Copy and complete this table of values. Use your answers to part a. x −5 2 1 2 y −7 47 Challenge 9 a Copy and complete the function machine for each table of values. i x y ii x y x −5 −3 2.5 4.4 y −9 −7 −1.5 0.4 x −24 −6 4.4 12.8 y −6 −1.5 1.1 3.2 b Write each function in part a as an equation. x – 4 ÷2 y x ×6 +8 y SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

129 9.4 Representing simple functions 10 Arun and Sofia are looking at this function machine and table of values. x y I think the equation for the function is y=3x+2 1 2 Is either of them correct? Show all your working. 11 Work out the equation for this function machine and table of values. x y Explain how you worked out your answer. 12 Zara is putting numbers into a two-step function machine. Read what Zara says. Work out the equation for Zara’s function. Show all your working. x −2 4 7 y −3 1 2 11 1 2 19 I think the equation for the function is y=2 1 2 x+1 1 2 x 1 3 5 y 1 11 21 When x=2, y=−4. As my x-values increase by 2, my y-values increase by 16. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

130 10.1 Percentage increases and decreases 10 Percentages Exercise 10.1 Focus 1 a Find 30% of 120kg b Increase 120kg by 30% c Increase 120kg by 60% 2 a Find 70% of $40 b Decrease $40 by 70% c Increase $40 by 70% 3 Increase 200km by a 10% b 25% c 75% 4 Decrease 15 hours by a 50% b 20% c 80% 5 Increase 280 by a 15% b 85% c 135% 6 Decrease 6400 by a 12% b 62% c 92% Practice 7 a What percentage of 400 is 250? b What percentage of 250 is 400? 8 A car costs $24700 and a motorcycle costs $9500 a What percentage of the cost of the car is the cost of the motorcycle? b What percentage of the cost of the motorcycle is the cost of the car? Key words percentage decrease percentage increase SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

131 10.1 Percentage increases and decreases 9 In a sale, the price of a phone is decreased by 60%. The original price was $230. Calculate the sale price. 10 Copy and complete this table to show the results of percentage changes. The first row is done for you. Original value New value Absolute change Percentage change 600 700 100 16.7% increase 75 40 36 100 43 12 250 30% decrease 90 160% increase 11 a Calculate the missing numbers in this chart. Increase Decrease Decrease Start Finish by 40% by 10% by 50% 600 b Work out the overall percentage change from the start to the finish. 12 The price of a television is $480. The price is reduced by $50. Then it is reduced by another $50. a Calculate the percentage reduction each time. Round your answers to 1 decimal place. b Find the absolute change after the two reductions. c Calculate the overall percentage decrease in price. Challenge 13 a The price of a jacket increases from $245 to $275. Work out i the increase in price ii the percentage increase. b The price of a hat increases from $42 to $72. Work out i the increase in price ii the percentage increase. c The price of a shirt increases by $30. This is a 50% increase. What was the original price of the shirt? SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

132 10 Percentages 14 One week there are 2324 visitors to an exhibition. The next week there are 5018 visitors. a Find the absolute increase in visitors. b Calculate the percentage increase in the number of visitors. c If the number of visitors increases by the same percentage in the following week, how many visitors will there be? 15 Look at this table. Year Population (billion) 1970 3.70 1990 5.33 2010 6.96 It shows the population of the world in billions. Has the world population increased at the same rate from 1970 to 2010? Justify your answer. 16 a Show that increasing $80 by 50% is the same as increasing it by 25% and then by 20%. b Is decreasing $80 by 50% the same as decreasing it by 25% and then by 20%? Justify your answer. 10.2 Using a multiplier Key word multiplier Exercise 10.2 Focus Use a multiplier method to answer these questions. 1 Find the multiplier for a an increase of 5% b an increase of 95% c an increase of 132% d an increase of 200%. 2 Find the multiplier for a decrease of a 14% b 67% c 97% 3 Increase each of these amounts by 60%. a $60 b 95kg c 280cm d 750mg 4 a Increase 200 by 75% b Increase 200 by 62.5% c Decrease 200 by 12.5% SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

133 10.2 Using a multiplier 5 What is the percentage change when you multiply by a 1.6 b 1.08 c 4 d 0.6 e 0.99 f 0.07? 6 a Increase 240 by 60% b Decrease 384 by 37.5% c What do you notice about your answers to a and b? Practice 7 a What percentage of 4 hours is 6.5 hours? b The length of a train journey increases from 4 hours to 6.5 hours. What is the percentage increase? 8 a What percentage of $680 is $490? b A price is reduced from $680 to $490. What is the percentage decrease? 9 The money in a bank account increases from $400 to $1000. Copy and complete these sentences. a $1000 is ……% of $400. b The money has increased by ……%. 10 There are 320 people in a room. Show that an increase of 10% followed by an increase of 50% is the same as an increase of 65%. Challenge 11 Work out the four missing numbers in this chart. Decrease by 20% Increase by % Decrease Increase by 150% by 60% 120 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

134 10 Percentages 12 This table shows the population of Indonesia. a Work out the percentage increase from 1960 to 2010. b Which decade had the largest percentage increase in population? What was the percentage? c Which decade had the smallest percentage increase in population? What was the percentage? d Use the table to estimate the population in 2020. Justify your answer. 13 a Here is a sequence of numbers increasing by 30 each time. 120 → 150 → 180 → 210 Calculate the percentage increase for each step. Round your answers to 1 decimal place. b Here is a sequence of numbers decreasing by 50 each time. 600 → 550 → 500 → 450 Calculate the percentage decrease for each step. c In this sequence the percentage increase for each step is the same. 300 → 540 → …… → …… Calculate the two missing numbers. 14 A new car costs $40000. The value falls by 20% per year. Show that after four years the value is approximately 60% less than the original value. Year Population (million) 1960 88 1970 115 1980 147 1990 181 2000 212 2010 242 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

135 11.1 Functions 11 Graphs Exercise 11.1 Focus 1 The cost of hiring a ladder is in two parts. There is a delivery charge of $10, plus a charge per day of $5. a Work out the cost of hiring a ladder for i 3 days ii 6 days. b The cost of hiring a ladder for n days is $h Write a function for h in terms of n. 2 Cinema tickets cost $8 each and there is a single booking fee of $4. a Work out the total cost of booking 5 tickets. b The total cost of booking t tickets is $y. Write a function for y in terms of t. 3 The cost of renting an apartment is in two parts. There is an agent’s fee of $65, plus a monthly rent of $750. a Find the total cost of renting for i 3 months ii 6 months. b The cost for m months is $r. Write a function for r. 4 A car has 37 litres of petrol in its tank at the start of a journey. It uses petrol at a rate of 6 litres per hour. a Work out how many litres are in the tank after i 2 hours ii 3 hours. b There are SAMPLE L litres in the tank after t hours. Write a formula for L. We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

136 11 Graphs Practice 5 A gardener plants a tree and measures the height every year. The height is h metres after t years and h=2t+3. a Find the height after 6 years. b By how much does the height increase each year? c What was the height of the tree when it was planted? 6 Here is a function: s=24–2t a Work out the value of s when i t=0 ii t=3 iii t=5 b What value of t makes s=0? 7 A man is 5 years more than twice a woman’s age. a Work out the man’s age if the woman is 20. b Work out the man’s age if the woman is 32. c The woman is w years old and the man is m years old. Write a function to show the relationship between their ages. 8 A boy is b years old and a girl is g years old g=3b–6. a Work out the girl’s age if the boy is 5 years old. b Describe in words the relationship between the ages of the girl and the boy. Challenge 9 a Work out the perimeter of this shape when x=6. 3cm 2cm xcm 5cm xcm 4cm 4cm b The perimeter is p cm. Write a function for p in terms of x. c The area is acm2 SAMPLE . Write a function for a. We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

137 11.2 Plotting graphs 11.2 Plotting graphs 10 If x=2 then y=8. Which of these functions could be correct? A y=4x B y=2x+4 C y=6x–4 D y=12 – 2x E y=9x–10 11 Here is a function: y=30x+15 Give the details of a situation this function could describe. Explain what the numbers 30 and 15 represent. 12 Here is a function: y=5n+10 It shows the cost, in dollars, of hiring a bike for n days. a Show that the cost for 14 days is less than twice the cost for 7 days. b Zara pays to hire the bike for a certain number of days but she returns the bike one day early. She gets a refund for the day she did not use. How much is the refund? Exercise 11.2 Focus 1 A function is y=2x–2. a Copy and complete this table of values. x −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 y=2x–2 −6 8 b Use the table to plot a graph of y=2x– 2. 2 Here is a function: y=3x+4 a Copy and complete this table of values. x −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 y=3x+4 −5 4 b Use the table to draw a graph of y=3x+4. Key word plot SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

138 11 Graphs 3 Here is a function: y=5–x a Copy and complete this table. x −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 y=5–x 7 4 0 b Use the table to draw a graph of y=5–x. 4 Here is a function: y=4x–1 a If x=3 work out the value of y. b Copy and complete this table. x −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 y=4x–1 c Use the table to draw a graph of y=4x–1. Practice 5 Here is a function: y=6–2x a If x=−2 show that y=10. b Copy and complete this table. x −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 y=6–2x c Use the table to draw a graph of y=6–2x. d If the line is extended, which of these points will be on the line? A (−4, 14) B (6, −4) C (−8, 20) D (10, −14) E (−10, 26) 6 y=15x+10 a Copy and complete this table. x −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 y=15x+10 b Draw a graph of y=15x+10. c Where does the line cross the y-axis? 7 a Copy and complete this table of values for 60 –x. x −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 60–x 80 20 b Use your table to draw a graph of y=60–x. c Where does the line cross the y-axis? d If the line is extended, where does it cross the x-axis? SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

139 11.2 Plotting graphs 8 a Copy and complete this table of values for 5x+20. x −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5x+20 15 35 b Draw a graph of y=5x+20. c Copy and complete this table of values for 30 – 5x. x −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 30–5x 40 10 d On the same axes as for part b, draw a graph of y=30–5x. e Where do the two lines cross? 9 Here is the equation of a line: y=25x– 10 Copy and complete the coordinates of these points on the line. a (5, ) b (8, ) c (−2, ) d ( , 15) e ( , 90) Challenge 10 The width of this rectangle is xcm. The length is 3cm more than the width. a The perimeter is pcm. Write a function for p. b Copy and complete this table of values. x 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 p 26 c Use the table to draw a graph. Put p on the vertical axis. d The perimeter of the rectangle is 20 cm. Use your graph to find the width of the rectangle. 11 An electrician visits a customer’s home. The total cost is in two parts: a fixed charge of $50 and an hourly rate of $30. a The total charge for t hours is y dollars. Write a formula for y. b Copy and complete this table of values. t 1 2 3 4 5 y c Use your table to draw a graph. Put t on the horizontal axis. d The electrician charges $185 for a job. Use the graph to work out how long it took. x + 3cm x + 3cm xcm xcm SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

140 11 Graphs 11.3 Gradient and intercept Key words equation of a line gradient x-intercept y-intercept 12 The temperature (T°C) after m minutes is given by the function T = 70 – 6m. a Construct a table for values of m, from 1 to 6, and T. b Use the table to draw a graph of T=70–6m. Put m on the horizontal axis. c How does the graph show that the temperature is decreasing at a constant rate? d Use your graph to find the time when the temperature is 55°C. 13 The cost ($y) of hiring a drill for x days is given by the function y = 4x+10. a Draw a graph to show the cost of hiring the drill for up to 7 days. b Explain what the 10 in the function tells you. c Explain what the 4 in the function tells you. Exercise 11.3 Focus 1 a Copy and complete this table of values. x −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 x+2 −2 5 b Plot a graph of y=x+2. c On the same axes, plot a graph of y=x. d Find the gradient of each line. 2 a Copy and complete this table of values. x −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 2x–1 −9 1 b Plot a graph of y=2x–1. c On the same axes, plot a graph of y=2x. d Find the gradient of each line. e Find the y-intercept of each line. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

141 11.3 Gradient and intercept 3 a Copy and complete this table of values. x −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5x −15 10 5x+10 −5 20 b On the same axes, plot graphs of y=5x and y=5x+10. c Find the gradient of each line. d Find the y-intercept of each line. 4 a Copy and complete this table. x −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 x+3 0 6 b Copy and complete this table. x −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 2x+3 −3 9 c On the same axes, plot the lines y=x+3 and y=2x+3. d Find the gradient of each line. e Find the y-intercept of each line. Practice 5 Here are the equations of three lines. y=x y=2x y=3x a On the same axes, plot a graph of each line. b Write the gradient of each line. 6 a Copy and complete this table. x −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 −x+7 9 3 b Copy and complete this table. x −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 −x+2 1 c On the same axes, plot graphs of y=−x+7 and y=−x+2. d Write the gradient of each line. e Write the y-intercept of each line. f Write the x-intercept of each line. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

142 11 Graphs 7 Here is the equation of a line: y=10 – 5x a What is the gradient of the line? b Where does the line cross the y-axis? c Where does the line cross the x-axis? d Write the equation of a parallel line that passes through the origin. 8 a Copy and complete this table. x −2 −1 0 1 2 3 10x+20 10 50 b Plot a graph of y=10x+20. c On the same axes, plot a graph of y=5x+20. d Write the gradient and the y-intercept of each line. Challenge 9 Four lines are plotted on this diagram. They all cross the y-axis at (0, 6). The gradients of the lines are 1, −1, 2 and −2. a Write the equation of each line. b Write the coordinates of the x-intercept of each line. 10 The water in a tank is leaking out. The number of litres (y) left in the tank after x hours is given by the function y=18–3x. a Copy and complete this table. x 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 18–3x 9 b Plot a graph to show the quantity of water in the tank over time. c What happens after 6 hours? d What does the y-intercept tell you? e What is the gradient? What does it tell you? 11 Here are three parallel lines. a The equation of one of the lines is y=10x+20. Which line is this? b Find the equations of the other two lines. c Write the equation of a parallel line that passes through (0, −10). y x B A A1 B2 6 0 C C−1 D−2 D y x B A C 10 20 SAMPLE 30 We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

143 11.4 Interpreting graphs 12 The cost of a holiday depends on the number of nights. The cost for n nights is $c where c=100n+50. a Construct a table to show the cost for different values of n. b Draw a graph to show the cost. c Explain what the gradient of the line represents. 11.4 Interpreting graphs Exercise 11.4 Focus 1 Sofia and Zara are walking along the same path. a How far does Zara walk every 10 minutes? b Sofia starts after Zara. How long after? c How far does Sofia walk every 10 minutes? d The lines cross. What does the point where they cross show you? 2 Two buckets are being filled with water. a How much water is in each bucket initially? b Find the number of litres in each bucket after 1 minute. c How many litres are added to Bucket 1 each minute? d How many litres are added to Bucket 2 each minute? e When do the two buckets contain the same amount of water? 0 0 1 2 3 4 10 20 30 Minutes Zara Sofia Kilometres 40 50 60 0 0 2 3 1 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 2 3 Minutes Bucket 1 Bucket 2 Litres SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

144 11 Graphs 0 0 10 20 30 40 1 2 3 Hours Lorry Car Litres 4 0 0 10 20 30 40 50 1 2 3 Hours Plumber B Plumber A Dollars ($) 4 5 3 Zara and Sofia live together. Zara leaves home at 09:00 and cycles to the shops. When she gets there she waits for Sofia. a How long did Zara take to get to the shops? b How far are the shops from Zara’s house? Sofia leaves home after Zara and cycles to the shops. c What time did Sofia leave home? d Who cycled faster, Zara or Sofia? Give a reason for your answer. 4 A car and a lorry use petrol. The graph shows the amount of petrol left in each vehicle. a How much petrol is in the lorry initially? b How much petrol does the lorry use each hour? c How much petrol is in the car initially? d Copy and complete this table for the car. Hours 0 1 2 3 4 Litres e How much petrol does the car use each hour? Practice 5 This graph shows the charges for two plumbers. Each plumber has a fixed charge and an hourly charge. a Which plumber is cheaper for a job that lasts 1.5 hours? b Find the fixed charge for each plumber. c Copy and complete this table for Plumber A. Hours 0 1 2 3 4 5 Cost d Work out the hourly charge for Plumber A. e Work out the hourly charge for Plumber B. 09:00 0 1 2 3 4 5 09:30 Time Zara Sofia Distance (km) SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

145 11.4 Interpreting graphs 6 Arun and Marcus are 400 metres apart. They run towards each other. This graph shows their distances from Arun’s starting point. a How long does Arun take to run 200m? b How far does Arun run every 10 seconds? c How far does Marcus run every 10 seconds? d What does the point where the lines cross show you? 7 The cost of hiring a coach depends on the number of people. This graph gives the costs for two different companies, A and B. a Find the cost of a coach for 30 people with company A. b When is company A cheaper than company B? c Copy and complete this table of values for company A. People 0 10 20 30 40 50 Cost ($) 300 For each company, there is a fixed charge and a cost per person. d For company A, work out i the fixed charge ii the charge per person. e For company B, work out i the fixed charge ii the charge per person. 0 0 100 200 300 400 500 10 20 30 People A B 40 50 Dollars 0 0 100 200 300 400 10 20 30 Time (seconds) Marcus Arun 40 50 60 Distance (m) SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

146 11 Graphs 0 0 20 30 10 40 50 60 70 80 1 2 3 Minutes A B 4 5 6 Temperature (C) 0 0 100 150 50 200 250 300 350 400 1 4 2 3 6 5 Days A B 7 10 8 9 Dollars Challenge 8 The heights of two plants are measured each week. The results are shown on this graph. a Work out the initial height of each plant. b How does the graph show that each plant grows an equal amount each week? c How much does each plant grow each week? d After x weeks, the height of a plant is ycm. The equation of the line for plant X is y = 5x+10. Work out a similar equation for plant Y. e Assume the plants continue to grow at the same rate. When will they be the same height? 9 Two liquids are heated to 78 °C. a Work out how much the temperature of liquid A increases each minute. b The temperature of liquid B increases in three stages. Work out the rate of increase per minute at each stage. 10 A company offers two types of cement mixer for hire. The graph shows the costs of hiring these cement mixers. a For each type of cement mixer, A and B, find the charge for 4 days’ hire. Suppose the charge for x days is $y. b Show that, for mixer A, the equation of the line is y=20x+180. c Find a similar equation for mixer B. 0 0 10 20 30 40 50 1 2 3 X Y 4 5 6 Height (cm) Weeks SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

147 12.1 Simplifying ratios 12 Ratio and proportion Exercise 12.1 Focus 1 Simplify each ratio. Some of them have been started for you. a 3 : 9 : ÷3 ÷3 b 2 : 18 : ÷2 ÷2 c 5 : 40 d 3 : 12 e 6 : 18 f 10 : 2 : ÷2 ÷2 g 30 : 3 : ÷3 ÷3 h 27 : 3 i 700 : 10 j 16 : 4 2 Simplify each ratio. Some of them have been started for you. a 6 : 8 : ÷2 ÷2 b 8 : 12 : ÷4 ÷4 c 12 : 15 d 15 : 25 e 25 : 35 f 32 : 24 : ÷8 ÷8 g 36 : 24 : ÷12 ÷12 h 27 : 24 i 36 : 27 j 40 : 24 Key words ratio simplify SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

148 12 Ratio and proportion Is Arun correct? Explain your answer. 8 Simplify each ratio. a 400m: 0.8km:60m b 4 g : 2200mg: 0.8g c 1 2 hour: 1 minute : 20 seconds d 45 cents: $0.15 : $2 e 6m: 0.09km: 300cm f 48 cm: 88mm:0.4m 3 Simplify each ratio. Divide all the numbers in the ratio by the highest common factor (written in the bracket). The first one is done for you. a 2: 10:12 (divide by 2) Answer is 1 :5 : 6 b 8: 12:16 (divide by 4) Answer is …………… c 12: 9:15 (divide by 3) Answer is …………… 4 Simplify each ratio. a 25: 30:10 b 32: 8:64 c 36 : 9:15 5 This is part of Karen’s homework. Question Simplify the ratio 6 : 20 :10 Answers 6 : 20 simplifies to 3 :10 20 :10 simplifies to 2 :1 So the ratio is 3 :10 : 2 :1 a Explain the mistake Karen has made. b Work out the correct answer. Practice 6 Simplify each ratio. a 250m: 1km b 2m:15 cm c $1.26:60 cents d 2.4kg :600 g e 1 minute : 42 seconds f 1.75 t:500kg 7 Arun uses 600g of walnuts and 1kg of dates in a fruit loaf. The ratio of walnuts to dates is 6 : 1. Tip Remember, both quantities must be in the same units before you simplify. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

149 12.1 Simplifying ratios 9 Zara and Marcus are baking a huge cake. They mix 450 g of butter with 550 g of sugar and 1.1kg of flour. The ratio of butter to sugar to flour is 4 : 5 : 11. The ratio of butter to sugar to flour is 45 : 55 : 11. Is either of them correct? Explain your answer. 10 Work out. a Two cups hold 450ml and five mugs hold 1.25 litres. Which holds more liquid, one cup or one mug? b Three bags of red rice have a mass of 960 g and four bags of brown rice have a mass of 1.22kg. Which has a greater mass, one bag of red rice or one bag of brown rice? c Jules can text 16 words in 48 seconds. Sion can text 10 words in 35 seconds. Who can text more quickly, Jules or Sion? Challenge 11 Simplify each ratio. a 0.4 :2 b 2.5 : 5 c 0.8: 3.2 d 0.5 :2.5 e 3.6 :1.8 f 2.1:1.5 g 2.5 :6 h 2.1 :1.4 i 0.05:0.3: 1 12 Abbie is trying to find the quickest way to drive to her new job. She tries three different routes and writes down how long each one takes. a Abbie thinks the ratio of her times for routes 1, 2 and 3 is 5: 6:7. Without doing any calculations, explain how you know that Abbie is wrong. Tip Remember to multiply by 10 or 100 first so all the numbers are whole numbers not decimals. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication