
200 15 Distance, area and volume 8 Here are four shapes, A, B, C and D. A 5.9cm 4.2cm B 10.3cm 3.2 cm C 3.9cm 5.3cm D 3.9 cm 5.9cm 2.9cm Here are five area cards. i 14.21 cm2 ii 16.48cm2 iii 18.41 cm2 iv 20.67 cm2 v 24.78 cm2 a Using only estimation, match each shape with the correct area card. Show your working. b Use a calculator to check your answers to part a. c Which area card did you not use? 9 This parallelogram has an area of 43.4 cm2 . It has a perpendicular height of 28mm. 28 mm ?mm Area = 43.4cm2 What is the length of the base of the parallelogram? 10 Work out the area of each compound shape. a 9cm 8 cm 7cm b 6.5m 2.5m 4m 7m Challenge 11 The diagram shows a trapezium with an area of 7182mm2 . 14.2 cm ? cm 8.6 cm What is the perpendicular height of the trapezium? Tip Remember, 1cm2=100mm2 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

201 15.2 The area of a parallelogram and trapezium 12 Kai works out that the shaded area in this diagram is 875 cm2 . 40cm 14cm 15 cm 30 cm 28cm Is Kai correct? Show your working. 13 Work out the area of each shape. Give each answer as a fraction in its simplest form. Remember to give the units with your answers. a 1 m 3 1 m 2 b 3 m 7 5 m 6 c 3 m 4 2 m 3 1 m 5 14 Work out the area of this plot of land. Give your answer in a square kilometres b square miles. 15 Windscreen glass for a van costs $250 per square metre. The diagram shows a van windscreen in the shape of a trapezium. Work out the cost of the glass for the windscreen. 40miles 80km 1.4m 1.6m SAMPLE 0.80.8mm We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

202 15 Distance, area and volume 15.3 Calculating the volume of triangular prisms Exercise 15.3 Focus 1 Copy and complete the workings to find the volume of each triangular prism. a 3cm 4cm 8cm Area of cross-section = × × 1 2 b h = × × 1 2 3 4 = cm2 Volume=area of cross-section×length = ×8 = cm3 b 6m 5m 9m Area of cross-section = 1 2 × ×b h = 1 2 × × = m2 Volume=area of cross-section×length = ×9 = m3 2 Work out the volume of each triangular prism. a 10cm 8cm 20cm b 3m 5m 12m Key words cross-section prism SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

203 15.3 Calculating the volume of triangular prisms 3 This is part of Anil’s homework. Question Work out the volume of this triangular prism. 8cm 10cm 9cm 30cm Answer Area of cross-section= 1 2 × b × h = 1 2 × 10 × 9=45 cm2 Volume=area × length=45 × 30=1350 cm3 Anil has got the answer wrong. Explain the mistake Anil has made and work out the correct answer. 4 Joe and Alice use different methods to work out the volume of this triangular prism. 5m 6m 8m a Copy and complete their methods. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

204 15 Distance, area and volume Show that both methods give an answer of 120m3 . Joe Area of cross section= 1 2 × b × h = 1 2 × × = m2 Volume=area of cross-section × length = × = m3 Alice Volume=area of cross-section × length = 1 2 × b × h × l = 1 2 × × × = m3 b Whose method do you prefer, Alice’s or Joe’s? Explain why. Practice 5 The table shows the base, perpendicular height and length of four triangular prisms. Copy and complete the table. Base Height Length Volume a 6cm 10cm 20mm cm3 b 0.5cm 12mm 6mm mm3 c 1.5m 6m 80cm m3 d 40mm 4cm 400mm cm3 6 Work out the volume of each compound prism. a 8 cm 6 cm 10 cm 5cm b 10mm 12mm 30mm 20mm Tip For each part, make sure the length, width and height are in the same units before you work out the volume. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

205 15.3 Calculating the volume of triangular prisms 7 Here are three sets of cards. The white cards show the volumes of four triangular prisms. The grey cards show the areas of the cross-sections of the four triangular prisms. The black cards show the lengths of the four triangular prisms. V=72cm3 V=84 cm3 V=90cm3 V=108 cm3 A=12cm2 A=9cm2 A=18cm2 A=15 cm2 l=6cm l=4cm l=12cm l=7cm Match each white card with the correct grey and black card. 8 The diagram shows a triangular prism. 14mm The volume of the prism is 350mm3 . Work out the area of the shaded triangle. Challenge 9 The diagram shows a triangular prism. The volume of the prism is 224 cm3 . a Work out the area of the shaded triangle. b Find the base and height of two possible triangular prisms with this volume. Explain how you worked out your answers. 10 The diagram shows a triangular prism. The volume of the prism is 756mm3 . Work out the base length of the triangle. height base 7cm 9mm base SAMPLE 24mm We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

206 15 Distance, area and volume 11 A triangular prism has a base of 8m, a height of 12m and a length of 7m. a Work out the volume of the triangular prism. b Work out the dimensions of two other triangular prisms with the same volume. 12 The diagram shows a concrete ramp in the shape of a triangular prism. 1.4m 5m 20cm 1m3 of concrete has a mass of 2400kg. Hari thinks the mass of the ramp is more than 1700kg. Is Hari correct? Explain your answer. Show all your working. 15.4 Calculating the surface area of triangular prisms and pyramids Key words net surface area Exercise 15.4 Focus 1 Complete the workings to find the surface area of each solid shape. a 8 cm 9 cm 12 cm 10 cm 9 cm 8 cm 8 cm 10 cm 10 cm 12 cm B D E A C Area A=10×9= cm2 Area B=12×9= cm2 Area C=Area A= cm2 Area D=1 2 ×12×8= cm2 Area E=Area D= cm2 Total area= + + + + = cm2 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

207 15.4 Calculating the surface area of triangular prisms and pyramids b 6 cm 4 cm 4 cm 6 cm 3 cm 5 cm 6 cm 5 cm 3 cm 3 cm B D E A C Area A=5×6= cm2 Area B=4× = cm2 Area C= × = cm2 Area D=1 2 ×4×3= cm2 Area E=Area D= cm2 Total area= + + + + = cm2 c 8 cm 8 cm 10 cm 10 cm 8 cm E A C B 8 cm D Area A=8×8= cm2 Area B= 1 2 ×8×10= cm2 Area of all four triangles=4× = cm2 Total area= + = cm2 Tip B, C, D and E are identical triangles, so their areas are the same. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

208 15 Distance, area and volume 2 This is part of Simon’s homework. Question Work out the surface area of this triangular prism. Answer Area of triangle= 1 2 × base × height = 1 2 × 24 × 10 = 120 Surface area=area × length = 120 × 10 = 1200 cm2 10cm 24cm 26cm 10cm Simon’s answer is wrong. a Explain the mistake he has made. b Work out the correct answer. Practice 3 For each solid i sketch a net ii work out the surface area. a triangular prism (isosceles) 15cm 20cm 9cm 24cm b triangular prism (right-angled triangle) 12cm 10cm 5cm 13cm c square-based pyramid, all triangles equal in size 11m 12m d triangular-based pyramid, all triangles equal in size 7cm 8cm SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

209 15.4 Calculating the surface area of triangular prisms and pyramids 4 Mia draws a sketch of a cube of side length 35mm. She also draws a sketch of an isosceles triangular prism with the dimensions shown. 35mm 5cm 27.5mm 3cm 8cm Mia thinks the cube and the triangular prism have the same surface area. Is Mia correct? Show clearly how you worked out your answer. 5 The diagram shows a triangular-based pyramid and a cuboid. Show that the surface area of the triangular-based pyramid is more than double the surface area of the cuboid. Challenge 6 Look at the diagram. 79cm 93cm 79mm 1.22m 409mm Razi thinks the triangular prism has a smaller surface area than the cuboid. Use estimation to decide whether Razi is correct. 7 This cuboid has a height of xcm. The width of the cuboid is twice the height. The length of the cuboid is three times the height. a Work out a formula for the surface area of the cuboid. b In cuboid A, x=3. In cuboid B, x=5. Use your formula to work out the total surface area of the two cuboids (surface area of A+surface area of B). 8 The surface area of this triangular-based pyramid is the same as the surface area of a cube of side length 12mm. Work out the height of the triangular face. 4m 2.5m 3m 9m 7m xcm length width height 27mm SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

210 Key words class interval classes frequency diagram 16.1 Interpreting and drawing frequency diagrams 16 Interpreting and discussing results Exercise 16.1 Focus 1 The frequency diagram shows the number of homeworks given to students from class 8B in one week. a How many students were given 6–8 homeworks? b How many students were given i 0–2 homeworks ii 12–14 homeworks? c How many more students were given 0–2 homeworks than were given 12–14 homeworks? d How many students are there in class 8B? 0–2 3–5 6–8 9–11 12–14 Number of homeworks Number of homeworks given to class 8B in one week Frequency 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 Tips For part c, use your answers to part b. For part d, add up the heights of all the bars. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

211 16.1 Interpreting and drawing frequency diagrams 2 The frequency table shows the number of bicycles sold by a shop each day during one month. Copy and complete the frequency diagram to show the data. Number of bicycles sold Frequency 0–4 6 5–9 8 10–14 3 15–19 10 20–24 4 3 The frequency table shows the number of breakfasts sold in a café each day during one month. a Draw a frequency diagram to show the data. b On how many days were 10–19 breakfasts sold? c On how many days were at least 20 breakfasts sold? Explain how you worked out your answer. d What is the total of the frequency column in the table? e How can you tell that the person who made the frequency table has made a mistake? Explain your answer. f The manager of the café says: ‘The frequency diagram shows that the greatest number of breakfasts sold in one day was 49.’ Is the manager correct? Explain your answer. Practice 4 The frequency table shows the time taken by 30 people to complete a puzzle. a Explain what the class 0<t ⩽ 5 means. b Explain why you cannot use the classes 0–4, 5–9, etc. c In which class would you include someone who took exactly 15 minutes to complete the puzzle? Tip Compare your answer to part d with the number of days in one month. 2 3 1 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 0–4 5–9 10–14 Frequency 15–19 20–24 Number of bicycles sold Number of bicycles sold in one month Number of breakfasts sold Frequency 0–9 1 10–19 3 20–29 7 30–39 11 40–49 5 Time, t minutes Frequency 0<t⩽5 3 5<t⩽10 12 10<t⩽15 9 15<t⩽20 6 SAMPLE 20<t⩽25 1 We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

212 16 Interpreting and discussing results d Copy and complete the frequency diagram below to show the data. 0 4 6 2 8 10 12 5 15 10 Frequency 20 25 Time (minutes) Time taken to complete a puzzle 5 The frequency table shows the mass of 25 adults. Mass of adults, m (kg) Frequency 65<m⩽70 4 70<m⩽75 9 75<m⩽80 7 80<m⩽85 2 85<m⩽90 3 a Draw a frequency diagram to show the data. b Read what Zara says. Is Zara correct? Explain your answer. The adults want to go horse riding. The maximum mass for horse riding is 80kg. c How many of the adults cannot go horse riding? 6 Here are the lengths, in millimetres, of twenty beetles. 12 4 18 16 6 19 15 10 17 12 5 22 7 11 20 14 18 15 3 9 a Record this information in a frequency table. Use the classes 0⩽l<5, 5⩽l<10, 10⩽l<15, 15⩽l<20 and 20⩽l<25. b Draw a frequency diagram to show the data. c How many of the beetles are at least 10mm long? Explain how you worked out your answer. The frequency diagram shows that the heaviest adult has a mass of 90 kg. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

213 16.1 Interpreting and drawing frequency diagrams Challenge 7 The frequency diagram shows the heights, in centimetres, of some plants. 0 2 3 1 4 5 6 7 10 30 20 Frequency 40 50 Height (cm) Heights of plants (cm) The tallest plant is 40 cm. Put the information from the frequency diagram into a frequency table. 8 The frequency table shows the heights of sunflowers grown in class 8V’s biology lessons. a Draw a frequency diagram to show the data. b The tallest student in class 8V is 1.6m. How many sunflowers are taller than the tallest student? c Marcus says: ‘The frequency diagram shows that the shortest sunflower was only 1m high.’ Is Marcus correct? Explain your answer. d Sofia says: ‘The frequency diagram shows that the tallest sunflower was exactly 2m high.’ Is Sofia correct? Explain your answer. e How many sunflowers were grown in class 8V’s biology lessons? 9 40 students were asked to text ‘Happy holiday!’ on a mobile phone. The time it took them, in seconds, was recorded. The results are shown below. 10.1 11.2 9.5 7.9 12.8 4.2 17.0 9.3 24.1 13.7 5.1 3.8 12.0 10.5 15.9 14.0 11.6 7.7 9.1 12.5 13.7 15.3 11.4 5.8 10.9 23.5 6.8 14.2 18.5 14.5 11.4 22.4 6.3 10.2 16.0 14.9 12.1 17.8 8.8 16.8 a Draw a frequency table to show the data. Decide on your own class intervals. b Draw a frequency diagram to show the data. Height of sunflowers, h (m) Frequency 1.0<h⩽1.2 2 1.2<h⩽1.4 3 1.4<h⩽1.6 6 1.6<h⩽1.8 12 1.8<h⩽2.0 5 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

16 Interpreting and discussing results 16.2 Time series graphs Key words time series graph trend Exercise 16.2 Focus 1 The time series graph shows how many drawing pins a company produced over a six-year period. a How many drawing pins were made in i 2009 ii 2010? b In which year did the company make 3 500000 drawing pins? c Between which two years was the greatest increase in production? d Between which two years was there no increase in production? e Between which two years was the smallest increase in production? f Describe the trend in the company’s production over the six-year period. 2 Kelly records the number of skis hired at her shop each month for one year. The data is shown in the time series graph. a Approximately how many skis were hired from Kelly’s shop in i March ii July? b In which month were the most skis hired? c Between which two months did the number of rentals triple? d Describe the trend in ski hires over the year. 2006 2007 2008 2009 2 1 4 3 6 7 5 0 2010 2011 Year Number of drawing pins produced Frequency (millions) J F M A M J J A O 40 20 80 60 0 S N D Month Number of skis hired per month Frequency 214 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

215 16.2 Time series graphs 3 Allana invests some money in 2005. The time series graph shows the value of her investment from 2005 to 2019. 4500 5000 5500 6000 6500 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 Value of investment ($) Year Value of investment from 2005 to 2019 a How much money did Allana invest in 2005? b Between which two years did Allana’s investment i stay the same ii increase the most iii decrease the most? c Describe the trend in the value of the investment from 2005 to 2019. Practice 4 The table shows the number of skateboards sold by a shop each month for one year. Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Number of skateboards 10 13 17 19 22 25 28 23 16 12 9 15 a Draw a time series graph to show the data. b During which two months was the greatest i increase in sales ii decrease in sales? c Describe the trend in the data. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

216 16 Interpreting and discussing results 5 The table shows the average price of books sold from ‘Brendan’s Books’ over a 20-year period. Year 1998 2002 2006 2010 2014 2018 Average price of books ($) 11.10 10.80 8.20 7.00 7.30 12.50 a Draw a time series graph to show the data. b In which four-year period did the price of books change the most? c Use your graph to estimate the average price of books sold from ‘Brendan’s Books’ in 2004. d Describe the trend in the data. 6 The time series graph shows the total number of points scored by two football teams in league two from 2010 to 2018. 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Total number of points Year Football league two points total from 2010 to 2018 Freetown FC Newtown FC a Describe the trend in the points total of i Freetown FC ii Newtown FC. b A football team will go up to league one if they have a points total of more than 46 points. Do you think Freetown FC will get enough points in 2019 to move up to league one? Explain your answer. c A football team will go down to league three if they have a points total of fewer than 20 points. Do you think Newtown FC will get enough points in 2019 to stay in league two? Explain your answer. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

217 16.2 Time series graphs Challenge 7 The table shows the number of visitors to a theme park from Autumn 2018 to Summer 2021. 2018 2019 2020 2021 A W Sp Su A W Sp Su A W Sp Su Number of visitors (1000s) 475 400 175 250 450 325 200 250 400 300 150 200 (Key: A = Autumn, W = Winter, Sp = Spring, Su = Summer) a Draw a time series graph for this data. b Describe how the number of visitors changes over the seasons during 2019. c Do similar changes over the seasons that you have noticed in 2019 also happen in the other years? Explain your answer. d Describe the yearly trend in the number of visitors. e Use your graph to predict the number of visitors in Winter 2021. f Explain why your answer to part e may be incorrect. 8 The time series graph shows the number of visitors to a riding stable each month from March to October in one year. Some of the points are missing. a Copy and complete the time series graph using the information below. 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 Month Visitor numbers to a riding stables per month Number of visitors 0 March April May June July August September October July had the most visitors and March had the fewest. The range in the number of visitors was 29. September had three times as many visitors as March. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

218 16 Interpreting and discussing results August had the same number of visitors as April and May added together. The ratio of visitors in April:May was 2 : 3. The number of visitors in June was 80% of the number of visitors in July. The mean number of visitors per month was 25. b Describe the trend in the data. 9 The table shows the mean monthly temperatures (°C) in Kangerlussuaq, Greenland and Port Stanley, Falkland Islands over one year. The temperatures are given to the nearest 1 °C. Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Kangerlussuaq –20 –21 –18 –8 3 9 11 8 3 –6 –12 –16 Port Stanley 11 10 9 7 5 3 2 3 5 7 8 10 a Make a copy of the axes below. On the axes, draw a line for each set of data. 12 8 4 0 –4 J F M A M Mean monthly temperature in Kangerlussuaq and Port Stanley J J A S O N D Months –8 Temperature (°C) –12 –16 –20 b Describe the trend in the data for i Kangerlussuaq ii Port Stanley. c Write a short paragraph comparing the temperatures in Kangerlussuaq and Port Stanley. You could use words such as ‘maximum’, ‘minimum’, ‘warmer’, ‘colder’, ‘variation’, ‘consistent’. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

219 16.3 Stem-and-leaf diagrams 16.3 Stem-and-leaf diagrams Key words mean mode stem-and-leaf diagram Exercise 16.3 Focus 1 This stem-and-leaf diagram shows the time, in seconds, it takes 10 students to complete a puzzle. Copy and complete: The times, in seconds, in order of size, from the fastest to the slowest are 30, 38, 39, … 2 This stem-and-leaf diagram shows the temperature, in °C, each day Fin was on holiday. a Write the temperatures in order, from the coldest to the warmest. b Work out the i mode ii median iii range. 3 This stem-and-leaf diagram shows the ages of the players in a football team. a Write the ages in order, from the youngest to the oldest. b Work out the i mode ii median iii range. Key: 3 3 0 8 9 9 4 2 4 6 7 7 8 0 means 30 seconds Key: 1 1 6 7 8 9 2 0 2 2 6 means 16 °C Key: 1 1 8 9 9 2 0 1 2 5 6 9 8 means 18 years 2 53 Tip Remember, the mode is the most common value, the median is the middle value and the range is the difference between the highest and lowest values. Practice 4 The stem-and-leaf diagram shows how long, to the nearest minute, it took students from class 8U to complete their homework. a How many students timed their homework? b What was the shortest time taken to complete the homework? c How many of the students took longer than 30 minutes? d For this data, work out i the mode ii the median iii the range. Key: 2 2 3 5 7 9 3 0 2 5 5 5 7 8 9 9 3 means 23 minutes 4 1 2 4 6 7 9 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

220 16 Interpreting and discussing results 5 The stem-and-leaf diagram shows the playing times, to the nearest minute, of some films. a How many films were timed? b How long was the shortest film, in minutes? c How many of the films lasted less than 2 hours? d How many of the films lasted more than 2 hours? e Why is your total for parts c and d together not the same as your answer for part a? f For this data, work out i the mode ii the median iii the range. 6 These are the masses, in grams, of 25 newborn mice. 6.4 7.3 6.4 8.9 6.9 7.8 6.0 6.2 8.5 7.1 5.9 7.2 8.0 9.5 8.2 5.9 7.5 6.4 7.3 8.6 5.8 9.2 6.9 6.1 9.0 a Draw an ordered stem-and-leaf diagram to show this data. b How many of the mice weighed less than 8 g? c What fraction of the mice weighed more than 9 g? d What percentage of the mice weighed between 6.3 and 7.9 g? e Use your stem-and-leaf diagram to work out i the mode ii the median iii the range. Challenge 7 These are the masses, in kilograms, of the motorbikes on sale in a showroom. 162 180 175 172 198 165 175 208 188 176 166 200 179 208 194 170 180 189 190 173 207 199 209 175 a Draw an ordered stem-and-leaf diagram to show this data. b How many of the motorbikes are heavier than 200kg? c What fraction of the motorbikes are lighter than 180kg? d What percentage of the motorbikes are 190kg or heavier? e Use your stem-and-leaf diagram to work out i the mode ii the median iii the mean. f Which average best represents this data? Give a reason for your answer. g Tia works out that the range in the masses of the motorbikes is 45kg. Is Tia correct? Explain your answer. Key: 10 10 5 7 8 11 3 3 3 5 7 8 9 2 means 102 minutes 12 0 2 4 5 6 7 8 8 13 3 5 7 7 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

221 16.3 Stem-and-leaf diagrams 8 The stem-and-leaf diagrams show the distances, to the nearest metre, that 29 students threw a tennis ball with their right hand and their left hand. Key: 0 Distance thrown with right hand 0 3 7 8 8 1 3 4 4 5 6 6 6 7 9 9 3 means 3 metres 2 0 2 3 5 5 6 8 3 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 8 Key: 0 Distance thrown with left hand 0 2 4 4 5 5 7 8 8 8 1 0 1 2 2 4 5 6 7 8 3 means 3 metres 2 0 1 1 2 3 4 4 8 2 5 83 a Copy and complete the table below showing the data for the distances thrown. Least distance Greatest distance Range Median distance Mean distance Modal distance Right hand Left hand b Make two comments about what the data shows. c How many students do you think are left-handed? Explain your answer. 9 The frequency table and the stem-and-leaf diagram show the same information. They both show the number of emails received by 60 employees of a company on one day. Anders has spilt tea over the diagrams. Key: 1 1 means 11 1 0 1 2 2 2 3 3 4 5 6 8 9 2 0 0 1 1 2 3 4 4 5 5 6 6 6 7 7 7 8 9 3 4 0–9 0 5 10 15 20 Frequency Number of emails 10–19 20–29 30–39 40–49 Use the information from the diagrams to draw a pie chart for the data. Tip Use the information to work out all the frequencies first. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

222 16 Interpreting and discussing results 16.4 Pie charts Key words pie chart proportions Exercise 16.4 Focus 1 The pie chart shows the favourite African animal of 45 students. a Work out the number of degrees for the Impala section. b Copy and complete the workings to write the fraction of students who chose each animal. Write each fraction in its simplest form. Giraffe: 120 360 1 3 = Zebra: 40 360 1 = Elephant: 160 360 4 = Impala: 360 1 = c Copy and complete the workings to find the number of students who chose each animal. Giraffe: 1 3 × 45 = 45 ÷ 3 = Zebra: 1 × 45 = Elephant: 4 × 45 = Impala: 1 × 45 = 2 The pie chart shows the favourite marine animal of 72 students. a Work out the number of degrees for the Whale section. b Copy and complete the workings to write the fraction of students who chose each animal. Write each fraction in its simplest form. Dolphin: 130 360 13 36 = Shark: 30 360 1 = Turtle: 110 360 11 = Whale: 360 1 = c Copy and complete the workings to find the number of students who chose each animal. Dolphin: 13 36 ×72= Shark: 1 × 72= Turtle: 11 × 72= Whale: 1 × 72= 130° 110° 30° Dolphin Shark Turtle Whale Favourite marine animal Favourite African animal 120° Giraffe Zebra Elephant Impala 160° 40° SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

223 16.4 Pie charts 3 Compare the pie charts in questions 1 and 2. Copy and complete these sentences. Use either ‘greater’ or ‘less’ in each space. a The proportion of students choosing Elephant was than the proportion of students choosing Dolphin. b The number of students choosing Elephant was than the number of students choosing Dolphin. c The proportion of students choosing Zebra was than the proportion of students choosing Shark. d The number of students choosing Zebra was than the number of students choosing Shark. Practice 4 The pie charts show the proportions of children of different ages in a kindergarten in 2018 and 2019. Ages of children in kindergarten in 2018 1 year old 2 years old 3 years old 4 years old 160° 30° 50° 120° Ages of children in kindergarten in 2019 60° 60° 190° 50° a What fraction of the children in the kindergarten were 1 year old in i 2018 ii 2019? b Copy and complete these sentences. Use the words in the rectangle. doubled stayed the same tripled halved more than tripled i In 2019, the proportion of children who were 3 years old had compared to 2018. ii In 2019, the proportion of children who were 2 years old had compared to 2018. iii In 2019, the proportion of children who were 1 year old had compared to 2018. In 2018, the total number of children in the kindergarten was 144. In 2019, the total number of children in the kindergarten was 72. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

224 16 Interpreting and discussing results c Show that the number of children aged 1 year old in the kindergarten was the same in 2018 and in 2019. d Show that there were four times as many children aged 3 years old in 2018 than in 2019. e How many more children aged 4 years old were there in 2018 than in 2019? 5 A group of men and women took part in a survey about favourite types of holiday. The group was made up of 180 men and 240 women. The pie charts show the results of the survey. Mens’ favourite types of holiday Womens’ favourite types of holiday Camping Activity Beach Cruise Camping Activity Beach 124° 189° 90° 120° Cruise a How many women preferred activity holidays? b How many men preferred activity holidays? c How many more women than men said they preferred beach holidays? Show how you worked out your answer. d The ‘Cruise’ sector is the same size in both pie charts. Without doing any calculations, explain how you know that more women than men preferred cruise holidays. 6 The pie charts show the favourite gym equipment of the members of two gyms. Wiston Gym Crundale Gym 18% 30% 12% 20% 15% 45% 20% 5% 4% 16% Treadmill Rowing machine Cross-trainer Exercise bike Weight machines Free weights 10% 5% Tip Use the fractions you found in part a. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

225 16.4 Pie charts Wiston Gym has 190 members. Crundale Gym has 120 members. Which gym had the larger number of members choose cross-trainer as their favourite equipment? Show your working. Challenge 7 The pie charts show the percentage of electricity produced from different sources by Argentina, Brazil and Chile. 68% 4% 25% 3% 64% 18% 17% 15% 25% 60% 0% Argentina electricity production Brazil electricity production Chile electricity production Fossil Nuclear Hydroelectric Other 1% Read what Sofia says. a Show that Sofia is correct. b Write a statement to compare the percentages of electricity produced from hydroelectric plants in Argentina, Brazil and Chile. c Write a statement to compare the percentages of electricity produced from other renewable sources in Argentina, Brazil and Chile. The table shows the number of kilowatts (kW) of electricity produced each year in Argentina, Brazil and Chile. Country Argentina Brazil Chile Number of kilowatts (kW) of electricity produced (nearest million) 40 150 24 Looking at the percentages of electricity produced from fossil fuels, the percentage in Argentina is four times the percentage in Brazil, and the percentage in Chile is more than three times the percentage in Brazil. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

16 Interpreting and discussing results d Work out the number of kilowatts of electricity produced from other renewable sources each year in Argentina, Brazil and Chile. Read what Marcus says. Looking at the number of kilowatts of electricity produced from other renewable sources, the number in Brazil is more than 22 times the number in Argentina, and the number in Chile is exactly 3 times the number in Argentina. e Is Marcus correct? Explain your answer. 8 The pie charts show the proportions of different sizes of coat sold in two shops in 2019. Sizes of coats sold in Outdoor Wear Sizes of coats sold in Coats-for-all Small Medium Large Extra-large 40° 80° 150° 90° 200° 90° 20° 50° In 2019, Outdoor Wear sold 900 coats in total. How many coats does Coats-For-All sell in total if they sell a the same number of small coats as Outdoor Wear b the same number of medium coats as Outdoor Wear c the same number of large coats as Outdoor Wear? 226 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

227 16.5 Representing data 9 The pie charts show the proportions of different activities booked by people at a water-sports centre on Thursday and Friday. Different activities booked on Thursday Different activities booked on Friday Windsurfing Canoeing Sailing Water-skiing 35° 120° 120° 85° 95° 105° 60° 100° On Thursday, 216 people booked activities at the water-sports centre. On Friday, the same number of people booked for windsurfing as on Thursday. a How many people booked for windsurfing on Friday? b How many people altogether booked an activity on Friday? 16.5 Representing data Exercise 16.5 Focus 1 Look at the following sets of data. Which type of diagram, graph or chart do you think is best to use to display the data? Choose from the options below. Justify your choice for each set of data. stem-and-leaf diagram compound bar chart scatter graph pie chart a The total numbers of adult and child tickets sold at a cinema on two different days. b The proportions of different makes of motorbike sold by one shop over a year. c The mass and length of newborn babies in a hospital. d The number of ice creams sold in a shop each day for one month. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

228 16 Interpreting and discussing results 2 A group of 40 girls play three different sports. 8 of the girls play football, hockey and tennis. 5 girls play football and hockey only, 4 girls play hockey and tennis only, and 7 girls play football and tennis only. 1 girl plays only football, 6 girls play only hockey and 9 girls play only tennis. a Draw a diagram, graph or chart to represent this data. b Justify your choice of diagram, graph or chart. c Make one comment about what your diagram, graph or chart shows you. 3 The table shows the number of times 50 people exercised in one month. Number of times people exercised in one month Number of people 0–4 18 5–9 9 10–14 13 15–19 4 20+ 6 a Draw a diagram, graph or chart to represent this data. b Justify your choice of diagram, graph or chart. c Make one comment about what your diagram, graph or chart shows you. Practice 4 The table shows the number of items of jewellery sold by two shops on one day. Item bracelet necklace ring earrings watch Shop A 3 14 8 18 2 Shop B 14 8 22 7 9 a Represent the number of items of jewellery sold by each shop on this day using i a dual bar chart ii a compound bar chart. Look at your charts in part a and answer these questions. b When you represent this data in a dual bar chart i what parts of the data is it easier to compare? ii what part of the data is it more difficult to compare? SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

229 16.5 Representing data c When you represent this data in a compound bar chart i what part of the data is it easier to compare? ii what parts of the data is it more difficult to compare? d Copy and complete each statement with either ‘dual bar chart’ or ‘compound bar chart’. i When you are comparing individual amounts, it is better to use a …………………. ii When you are comparing total amounts, it is better to use a …………………. 5 Shania measured the mass of 40 eggs laid by her chickens. The frequency table shows her results. Mass, m (g) Frequency 45⩽m<50 4 50⩽m<55 6 55⩽m<60 12 60⩽m<65 9 65⩽m<70 5 70⩽m<75 4 a Draw a diagram, graph or chart to represent this data. b Justify your choice of diagram, graph or chart. c Make one comment about what your diagram, graph or chart shows you. 6 These are the number of minutes it took 24 people to solve a puzzle. 25 15 18 40 19 45 25 26 32 22 18 36 41 18 33 19 17 35 21 48 39 42 11 30 a Draw a diagram, graph or chart to represent this data. b Justify your choice of diagram, graph or chart. c Make one comment about what your diagram, graph or chart shows you. d For this data, work out i the mode ii the median iii SAMPLE the range. We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

230 16 Interpreting and discussing results Challenge 7 A nurse recorded the ages of 12 patients. He also recorded the number of hours of sleep they needed, on average, per night. The table shows his results. Age (nearest year) 17 32 28 54 80 21 63 50 45 15 76 12 Number of hours of sleep 9 7.5 8.5 6.5 5 8 6.5 7 7 8 6 10 a Draw a diagram, graph or chart to represent this data. b Justify your choice of diagram, graph or chart. c Make one comment about what your diagram, graph or chart shows you. d For this data, work out i the mean age of the patients ii the mean number of hours of sleep the patients need per night. e Look at your answers to part d. Is the mean a suitable average to use to represent each set of data? Explain your answer. 8 The tables show some information about three Caribbean Islands: Barbados, St Lucia and Grenada. Population information about Barbados, St Lucia and Grenada Population Land area (km2) Land use (%) Median age (years) Life expectancy agriculture forest other male female (years) Barbados 293131 430 33 19 48 37.8 40.1 75.7 St Lucia 165510 606 17 77 6 34.3 36.6 78.1 Grenada 112207 344 32 50 18 32.0 32.2 74.8 Average weather recorded in Bridgetown (Barbados) Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Min (°C) 21 21 21 22 23 24 23 23 23 23 23 22 Max (°C) 28 29 30 30 31 31 30 31 30 30 30 29 Rain (mm) 65 40 35 50 70 105 140 145 170 175 180 95 Days of rain SAMPLE 12 9 7 7 7 14 19 15 15 15 14 13 We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

231 16.6 Using statistics Average weather recorded in Castries (St Lucia) Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Min (°C) 23 23 24 24 25 25 25 25 25 25 24 24 Max (°C) 29 29 29 30 31 31 31 31 31 31 30 29 Rain (mm) 125 95 75 90 125 200 245 205 225 260 215 160 Days of rain 14 9 10 10 11 15 18 16 17 20 18 16 Average weather recorded in St Georges (Grenada) Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Min (°C) 22 22 22 23 24 24 24 24 24 24 23 23 Max (°C) 30 30 31 31 31 31 31 31 31 31 31 30 Rain (mm) 115 80 65 70 115 220 230 220 200 245 245 175 Days of rain 14 9 10 7 13 17 20 18 17 20 20 18 Decide which diagrams, graphs or charts are best to use to represent this data. Make a poster to show some of the information above to describe facts about the three Caribbean islands. 16.6 Using statistics Exercise 16.6 Focus 1 In a hockey competition, Catalonia won and Andalucia was knocked out in the semi-finals. The numbers of goals they scored in their matches are shown in the box. a Work out the mean score for each team. b Use the means to state which team scored more goals, on average, per match. c Work out the range for each team. d Use the ranges to state which team’s scores were more varied. Catalonia 5, 6, 3, 2, 3, 4, 3, 3 Andalucia 2, 1, 1, 3, 1, 6, 0 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

232 16 Interpreting and discussing results 2 A scientist measured the masses of some male and female mice. Here are the results. Males 22g, 28 g, 21g, 27g, 24 g, 29g, 28 g, 27g, 23g Females 32g, 20 g, 30g, 18g, 21 g, 19g, 22 g, 24g a For each group i write the masses in order of size ii write the median mass iii work out the range in masses. b Use the medians to state which group is heavier, on average. c Use the ranges to state which group’s masses are less varied. 3 The number of school days missed by each member of class 8T in one month was recorded. Here are the results. Boys 1, 3, 0, 0, 0, 2, 1, 1, 1, 3, 2, 4, 1 Girls 0, 0, 2, 3, 1, 0, 2, 0, 5, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 3 a For each group i write the number of school days missed, in order, from most to least ii write the modal number of school days missed iii work out the range in the numbers of school days missed. b Use the modes to state whether boys or girls missed more school days, on average. c Use the ranges to state which is more varied, the number of school days missed by the boys or by the girls. Practice 4 A science teacher recorded the total test scores of the boys and girls in his class. The 12 girls had a total score of 276. The 15 boys had a total score of 315. Who did better on average, the boys or the girls? Give a reason for your answer. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

233 16.6 Using statistics 5 In a college, there are three adult language classes. Here is some information about the ages of the adults in each class. Class Number of people Mean age (years) Age range (years) Age of oldest person (years) Japanese 16 35 20 44 Spanish 28 37 33 65 English 34 26 45 64 Use the information in the table to answer these questions. Give reasons for your answers. a Which class has the highest average age? b Which class has the greatest variation in ages? c Work out the age of the youngest person in each class. Explain how you worked out your answer. 6 Pablo and Carlos play golf. They record their scores on the same golf course each week for 8 weeks. Here are their results. Pablo 73, 64, 74, 64, 72, 75, 64, 74 Carlos 73, 69, 70, 72, 71, 70, 72, 72 a Copy and complete this table to show Pablo’s and Carlos’s golf scores. Mean Median Mode Range Pablo Carlos b i Who do you think did better on average, Pablo or Carlos? ii Which average did you use to compare the scores? Why did you use this average? Why did you not use the other averages? c Who do you think had more consistent scores, Pablo or Carlos? Explain how you worked out your answer. Tip When you play golf, the lower your score the better. It is always the person with the lowest score who wins a competition. Tip ‘More consistent scores’ means scores that are SAMPLE less varied. We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

234 16 Interpreting and discussing results 7 Serena recorded the number of lengths of the swimming pool she swam on each visit for two months. March 40, 62, 30, 65, 40, 64, 42 April 42, 55, 44, 47, 52, 40, 46, 43, 45 a Work out the mean, the median and the range for each month. b State whether each of the following statements is True (T) or False (F). Justify your answers. i The number of lengths she swam per visit in March was higher, on average, than the number of lengths she swam per visit in April. ii The numbers of lengths she swam per visit in March were more varied than the numbers of lengths she swam per visit in April. c Is it possible to work out the modal number of lengths for each month? Explain your answer. Challenge 8 The table shows the number of goals scored in each match in the Men’s Football World Cup in 2010 and the Women’s Football World Cup in 2011. Goals scored 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 World Cup Men 2010 7 17 13 14 7 5 0 1 Women 2011 1 8 4 9 8 1 1 0 a Copy and complete this table for the number of goals scored by the men and women. Mean Median Mode Range Men 2010 Women 2011 b Which average is the best one to use to compare the number of goals scored by men’s teams and women’s teams in these two World Cups? c Use the average you selected in part b to decide whether more goals were scored in men’s matches or women’s matches in these two World Cups. d Were the numbers of goals scored per men’s match more or less varied than the numbers per women’s match? Explain how you worked out your answer. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

16.6 Using statistics 9 Here is some information about the ages of the men and women working for a company. Men Women Number of employees 43 72 Median age 38 29 Mean age 39.1 30.8 Modal age class 36–45 26–35 Youngest person 16 18 Oldest person 64 52 Describe the differences between the ages of the men and women. 10 The users of two websites were asked to grade them for ease-of-use. They used a scale of 1 to 5. 1 was poor and 5 was excellent. The results are shown in this table. Grade 1 2 3 4 5 Frequency Website A 4 18 11 16 11 Website B 35 5 8 25 27 Use averages to decide which website is better. Justify your choice. Tip Refer to the average age and the range of the ages. 235 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.