

150 12 Ratio and proportion b Abbie’s mum uses this method to work out the ratio of Abbie’s times. Route 1 : Route 2 : Route 3 55 mins : 1 1 2 hours : 1 hour 10 mins 0.55 : 1.5 : 1.1 Multiply by 100 55 : 15 : 11 Divide by 5 11 : 3 : 2 Explain the mistakes that Abbie’s mum has made. c Work out the correct ratio of Abbie’s times. 13 Any ratio can be written in the form 1 :n or n:1, like this: In the form 1 :n, 4 : 10 1 : 2.5 ÷4 ÷4 In the form n : 1, 4 : 10 0.4 : 1 ÷10 ÷10 Write these ratios i in the form 1 :n ii in the form n : 1. a 2: 4 b 3 : 12 c 5: 25 d 25:200 14 a On a piece of paper, draw three squares with side lengths 3 cm, 4 cm and 5cm. Measure the length of the diagonal of each square, correct to the nearest millimetre. Copy and complete the table below. You can use a calculator to work out the value for n in the last column of the table. Write your values for n correct to 1 d.p. Length of side Length of diagonal Ratio of lengths side:diagonal Ratio of lengths side:diagonal in the form 1:n 3cm 4cm 5cm b What do you notice about the ratios in the form 1 :n? c What do you think the length of the diagonal will be for a square with side length 8cm? Explain how you worked out your answer. d Predict the side length for a square with diagonal length 14cm. Explain how you worked out your answer. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

151 12.2 Sharing in a ratio Exercise 12.2 Focus 1 Copy and complete the workings to share $72 between Ali, Bob and Carl in the ratio 4 :1 : 3. Total number of parts: 4+1+3= Value of one part: $72÷ = Ali gets: 4× = Bob gets: 1× = Carl gets: 3× = 2 Share these amounts among Ali, Bob and Carl in the given ratios. Use the same method as in Question 1. a $90 in the ratio 1 :3:5 b $240 in the ratio 3 :4:5 c $1000 in the ratio 3 :5:2 d $350 in the ratio 5 :2:7 3 Gita, Harry and Indira share their electricity bill in the ratio 2 : 4 :5. a How much does each of them pay when their electricity bill is i $110 ii $165 iii $352? b Show how to check your answers to part a. 4 A gardening club is made up of men, women and children in the ratio 5: 4:11. Altogether, the club has 240 members. a How many members of the gardening club are i men ii women iii children? b Show how to check your answers to part a. 5 The angles in a triangle are in the ratio 2 :3: 4. What are the sizes of the angles in the triangle? Tip The angles in a triangle add up to 180°. 12.2 Sharing in a ratio Key words profit share SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

152 12 Ratio and proportion Practice 6 A box of shapes contains triangles, squares and rectangles in the ratio 5: 1 :2. The box contains 56 shapes altogether. a How many shapes in the box are i triangles ii squares iii rectangles? 14 of the shapes are taken out. There are now 42 shapes left in the box. The ratio of the numbers of triangles, squares and rectangles in the box is now 4 : 1:2. b Now, how many shapes in the box are i triangles ii squares iii rectangles? 7 Zara, Sofia, Arun and Marcus run their own business. They share the money they earn from each project in the ratio of the number of hours they work on the project. This is the time-sheet for one of their projects. How much does each of them earn from this project? Project earnings: $750 Time spent working on the project: Zara 5 hours Sofia 12 hours Arun 4 hours Marcus 9 hours 8 Four children are given a painting. They sell it and share the money in the ratio of their ages. The children are 6, 8, 11 and 13 years old. The painting sells for $4750. Show that the oldest child receives $1625. Tip Remember, there are now 42 shapes in the box. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

153 12.2 Sharing in a ratio 9 Every year, Patrick shares 280 oranges between his children in the ratio of their ages. This year, the children are 3, 7 and 10 years old. How many more oranges will the youngest child receive in five years’ time, than she received this year? 10 Tatiana, Lucia and Gianna buy a house for $120 000. Tatiana pays $10 000, Lucia pays $70 000 and Gianna pays the rest. Four years later, they sell the house for $210 000. They share the money in the same ratio in which they bought the house. Gianna thinks she will make $30000 profit on the sale of the house. Is Gianna correct? Show all your working. Challenge 11 Xiu, Zane and Mike buy a boat. The information shows how much each of them pays for the boat. Three years later, they sell the boat for $3300. They share the money from the sale of the boat in the same ratio in which they bought the boat. a How much does each of them receive from the sale of the boat? b How much money did Mike lose from the sale of the boat? c Who made the smallest loss from the sale of the boat? How much did he lose? 12 There are 24 coins in Zara’s purse. The ratio of 50 cent to 25 cent to 10 cent coins is 2 :3: 7. Show that she has $4.90 in her purse in total. 13 Heidi makes her favourite colour paint by mixing blue, yellow and green in the ratio 0.8 :1.1:0.1. Copy and complete the table to show how much of each colour she needs to make the quantities shown. Size of tin Blue Yellow Green 1 litre 1.5 litres 2.5 litres 5th August 2019 Xiu paid: $1400 Zane paid: $1050 Mike paid: $1750 Total cost of boat: $4200 Tip Start by rewriting 0.8:1.1:0.1 as whole numbers rather than SAMPLE decimal numbers. We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

154 12 Ratio and proportion Exercise 12.3 Focus Look at the example below. Harry and Misha make grey paint by mixing white and black paint. Harry mixes white with black in the ratio 2 :8 : : 2 : 8 ÷2 ÷2 1 : 4 Misha mixes white with black in the ratio 3 : 9 : : 3 : 9 ÷3 ÷3 1 : 3 Harry has the darker paint because he has four black for every white, while Misha has only three black for every white. 1 Arshan and Oditi make pink paint by mixing white paint and red paint. Arshan mixes white and red in the ratio 3 : 6. Oditi mixes white and red in the ratio 4 : 12. Copy and complete the workings to find out who has the darker paint. : ........................ 3 : 6 ÷3 ÷3 : ........................ 4 : 12 Arshan Oditi ÷4 ÷4 1 : ........ 1 : ........ Who makes the darker paint? Tip Think of Harry mixing four tins of black paint with one tin of white paint, while Misha mixes three tins of black paint with one tin of white paint. Tip Draw and colour the circles you need for the red paint, to help you compare. 12.3 Ratio and direct proportion Key words Justify Proportion Shades 14 Salim draws a quadrilateral. The angles are in the ratio 1 : 4:5:2. Salim thinks the largest angle is 110° more than the smallest angle. Is Salim correct? Explain your answer. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

155 12.3 Ratio and direct proportion 2 Jake and Razi make light blue paint by mixing white paint and blue paint. Jake mixes white and blue in the ratio 4 : 20. Razi mixes white and blue in the ratio 5 :15. Copy and complete the workings to find out who has the darker paint. 4 : 20 ÷4 ÷4 1 : ........ 5 : 15 Jake Razi ÷5 ÷5 1 : ........ : .................................... : .................................... Who makes the darker paint? Tip Draw and colour the circles you need for the blue paint, to help you compare. 3 Copy and complete the workings to change each ratio into a fraction. a A bag of nuts has brazil nuts and almonds in the ratio 2 :3. What fraction of the nuts are i brazil nuts ii almonds? Total number of parts=2+3= i Fraction that are brazil nuts= 2 ii Fraction that are almonds= 3 b A box of balls has tennis balls and footballs in the ratio 5 :4. What fraction of the balls are i tennis balls ii footballs? Total number of parts=5+4= i Fraction that are tennis balls= 5 ii Fraction that are footballs= 4 c A basket of vegetables has onions and potatoes in the ratio 1 : 9. What fraction of the vegetables are i onions ii potatoes? Total number of parts=1+9= i Fraction that are onions= 1 ii Fraction that are potatoes= 9 4 Jay mixes two shades of orange paint. He uses the following ratios of orange :white. Orange sunset 3 : 2 Orange flame 5 :3 a Copy and complete the workings to find the fraction of each paint that is orange. Orange sunset: total number of parts=3+2= fraction orange= 5 Orange flame: total number of parts=5+3= fraction orange= 8 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

156 12 Ratio and proportion b Copy and complete the workings to write the fractions with a common denominator. Orange sunset: fraction orange= 5 8 5 8 40 = = × × Orange flame: fraction orange= 8 5 8 5 40 = = × × c Which paint has the greater fraction that is orange, orange sunset or orange flame? d Which paint is darker, orange sunset or orange flame? Explain your answer. 5 Copy and complete the workings to answer this question. A school cricket club has 45 members. The ratio of boys to girls is 5: 4. a What fraction of the club members are boys? Total number of parts=5+4= Fraction boys= b How many boys are in the club? Boys in the club=fraction boys×45= × = 45 6 Ken mixes two different fruit drinks. He uses the following ratios of grape juice : pear juice. Fruit drink A = 2 : 7 Fruit drink B = 5 : 13 a Copy and complete the workings to find the fraction of each drink that is pear juice. Fruit drink A: total number of parts=2 + 7= fraction pear juice= Fruit drink B: total number of parts=5 + 13= fraction pear juice= b Copy and complete the workings to write the fractions with a common denominator. Fruit drink A: fraction pear juice= 9 2 9 2 18 = = × × Fruit drink B: fraction pear juice= c Which drink has the greater fraction that is pear juice, A or B? d Which drink will taste more of pear, A or B? Explain your answer. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

157 12.3 Ratio and direct proportion Practice 7 A bag of dried fruit contains banana chips and apricots in the ratio 7 : 3. The bag contains 40 pieces of dried fruit. a What fraction of the pieces of dried fruit are apricots? b How many apricots are there in the bag? 8 The ratio of boys to girls in a swimming club is 3 : 5. Which of these cards shows the number of children that could be in the swimming club? A 29 B 35 C 68 D 72 E 82 Justify your choice. 9 The ratio of men to women in a cafe is 7 :6. The number of adults in the cafe is greater than 30 but less than 40. How many adults are in the cafe? 10 Work out. a A bag contains blue and white counters. 3 4 of the counters are blue. What is the ratio of blue to white counters? b A box contains CDs and DVDs. 5 9 of the items are DVDs. What is the ratio of CDs to DVDs? c 7 10 of the learners in a Madarin class are women. The rest are men. What is the ratio of women to men in the Mandarin class? 11 Ru Shi mixes two shades of yellow paint. She uses the following ratios of yellow:white. Banana yellow 5 : 3 Mellow yellow 7 : 5 a What fraction of each shade of yellow paint is white? b Which shade of yellow paint is lighter? Show all your working. Justify your choice. 12 Gavin mixes a fruit drink. He uses orange juice and pineapple juice in the ratio 2 : 7. Matt mixes a fruit drink. He uses orange juice and pineapple juice in the ratio 3 : 10. a What fraction of each fruit drink is pineapple juice? b Whose fruit drink, Gavin’s or Matt’s, has the higher proportion of pineapple juice? Show all your working. Justify your choice. Tip The paint which is lighter has a greater proportion of white. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

12 Ratio and proportion Challenge 13 Li and Su collect magazines and puzzle books. Li has 30 magazines and 12 puzzle books. Su has 45 magazines and 18 puzzle books. Who has the greater proportion of magazines? Justify your choice. 14 Two clothes shops sell coats and jumpers. ‘Clothes 4 U’ has 24 coats and 60 jumpers for sale. ‘Clothes 2 Keep’ has 40 coats and 95 jumpers for sale. Which shop has the greater proportion of coats? Justify your choice. 15 A builder makes concrete for a floor. He uses cement, sand and gravel in the ratio 1:2: 4. a What fraction of the concrete is sand? The builder makes 2.1 tonnes of concrete. b How many kilograms of sand does he use? 16 The ratio of women to men in a badminton club is ?: 5. There are more men than women. The number of adults in the badminton club is 28. How many women are in the badminton club? Tip Start by trying different values for ? in the ratio. 158 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

159 13.1 Calculating probabilities 13 Probability Exercise 13.1 Focus 1 A spinner has sectors in different colours. The probability it is green is 0.15 and the probability it is brown is 0.4. Find the probability that it is a not green b not brown. 2 A train can arrive early, on time or late. The probability the train arrives early is 5% and the probability it arrives late is 15%. Work out the probability that it is a not early b not late c not on time. 3 A dice is biased. The probability of throwing 3 is 1 4 and the probability of throwing 6 is 1 8 . Work out the probability of a not throwing 3 b not throwing 6. 4 Arun throws a coin repeatedly until he throws a head. This table shows the probability for different numbers of throws. Throws 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 or more Probability 1 2 1 4 1 8 1 16 1 32 1 64 1 64 Find the probability that Arun takes a more than 1 throw SAMPLE b more than 2 throws. We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

160 13 Probability Practice 5 A spinner has 3 equally likely colours, red (R), yellow (Y) and green (G). The spinner is spun twice. a Copy and complete this table of outcomes. Second spin G RG Y GY R YR R Y G First spin Find the probability of b green on both spins c a red and a yellow d not getting red e getting red at least once. 6 A spinner has 7 equally likely sectors numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7. The spinner is spun and a coin is thrown. a Draw a table to show the possible outcomes. Work out the probability of b a head and a 5 c a tail and an even number d a head but not a 5. 7 Here are three numbered cards. Sofia puts the cards in a line at random to make a 3-digit number. a List all the possible outcomes. b Find the probability that the number is i an odd number ii a multiple of 5 iii less than 700. 8 Here are two sets of cards. Set A Set B 1 2 3 1 2 4 3 One card is taken at random from each set and they are added together. a Copy and complete this table to show the possible totals. 3 7 2 1 3 1 2 3 4 green red yellow 5 6 7 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

161 13.1 Calculating probabilities b Work out the probability that the total is i 3 ii 5 iii less than 5 iv an odd number. 9 Two fair six-sided dice are thrown and the numbers are multiplied together. a Draw a table to show the possible outcomes. b What is the most likely product? What is the probability of this product? c Find the probability of getting more than 15. d Find the probability of getting an odd number. Challenge 10 Two fair six-sided dice are thrown and the difference between the numbers is found. Find all the possible differences and find the probability of each one. 11 Here are four number cards. Two cards are chosen at random to make a 2-digit number. a List all the 2-digit numbers you can make with these cards. b Find the probability that the number has a 4 as one of the digits. Three cards are chosen at random to make a 3-digit number. c List all the 3-digit numbers you can make with these cards. d Find the probability that the number is not a multiple of 5. e How many 4-digit numbers can you make with these cards? Give a reason for your answer. f A 4-digit number is made at random. What is the probability that it is not 6534? 12 A spinner has 3 equal sectors coloured red (R), green (G) and blue (B). The spinner is spun twice. a Copy and complete this tree diagram to show the possible outcomes. b Find the probability of i red on both spins ii green on both spins iii not getting green on both spins iv getting green on at least one spin. Tip For example, if 3 and 5 are thrown, the difference is 2. 3 4 5 6 Second spin First Outcome spin R R R R R G R B G B R G B G B SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

162 13 Probability Key words experimental probability theoretical probability 13.2 Experimental and theoretical probabilities 13 Here are two words on cards. S Q U A R E T R I A N G L E One card is taken at random from each word. Find the probability that both cards show the same letter. Show how you found the answer. Exercise 13.2 Focus 1 Arun makes a six-sided cardboard dice. He colours three faces orange, two faces pink and one face white. He throws his dice 80 times. Here are the results. Colour orange pink white Frequency 34 28 18 a Calculate the experimental frequency for each colour. b Work out the theoretical frequency for each colour. 2 A dice is thrown 80 times. Here are the results. 6 4 5 2 3 3 3 5 1 2 3 1 4 3 5 3 6 5 2 1 4 4 5 4 4 4 6 1 5 6 4 4 1 6 3 3 5 6 6 6 6 5 1 1 1 3 2 1 4 4 3 4 5 5 6 3 4 5 4 3 4 4 2 6 6 1 5 1 4 4 1 6 SAMPLE 4 1 5 5 5 2 1 1 We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

163 13.2 Experimental and theoretical probabilities a Use the first two rows to find an experimental probability of getting a 1. b Use the first four rows to find an experimental probability of getting a 1. c Use all eight rows to find an experimental probability of getting a 1. d Which of your experimental probabilities is closest to the theoretical probability? e Repeat parts a to d but this time find the probabilities of getting an even number. 3 A spinner has four equal parts coloured yellow, blue, green and red. Here are the results of 60 spins. B Y R G R G G Y Y R B Y G B Y G G G G Y G R B R Y G Y Y R B B G G R R G Y G G Y R R B G G Y B G B G B G R G B B B B G R a Find the experimental probability of each colour. b Compare the experimental probabilities with the theoretical probabilities. Practice 4 A spinner has five equal sectors numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Here are the results of 400 spins. Score 1 2 3 4 5 Frequency 90 83 86 66 75 a Find the experimental probabilities of i 2 ii an odd number iii 4 or 5 b Find the theoretical probabilities of i 2 ii an odd number iii 4 or 5 c Do you think the spinner is fair? Give a reason for your answer. 5 When you throw three coins you can get 0, 1, 2 or 3 heads. Here are the results of a computer simulation of 500 throws of three coins. Number of heads 0 1 2 3 Frequency 59 180 192 69 a Find the experimental probabilities of 0, 1, 2 and 3 heads. b Work out the theoretical probabilities of 0, 1, 2 and 3 heads. c How close are the experimental probabilities to the theoretical ones? SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

164 13 Probability Here are the results of another 500 simulations. Number of heads 0 1 2 3 Frequency 69 196 172 63 d Combine the two sets of results to find experimental probabilities based on 1000 throws. e Are the experimental probabilities in part d closer to the theoretical probabilities than those in part a? Challenge 6 A dice has 10 faces. Each face is one of three colours, green, gold or black. Here are the results of 400 throws. Colour green gold black Frequency 121 231 48 a Find the experimental probability for each colour. b Make a conjecture about the number of faces of each colour. Give a reason for your answer. Here are the results of another 600 throws. Colour green gold black Frequency 172 372 56 c Calculate new experimental probabilities based on all the results. d Do you want to change your conjecture in part b? Give a reason for your answer. 7 a Can you throw a coin fairly? Do an experiment to find out. Decide how many times you will throw the coin. Use your results to calculate experimental frequencies and compare them with the theoretical frequencies. State your conclusion about your throwing. Give a reason. b How can you modify your experiment to see if you can throw two coins fairly? SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

165 Key word bearing 14.1 Bearings 14 Position and transformation Exercise 14.1 Focus 1 Match each diagram to the bearing you need to walk on to get from A to B. The first one is done for you: A and iii A B A N 80° B B A N 35° C B A N 160° D B A N 236° i 160° ii 300° iii 080° iv 035° v 236° E B A N 300° SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

166 14 Position and transformation 2 For each diagram, write the bearing you need to walk on to get from C to D. The first one is done for you. a C D N 115° b C D N 240° c C D N 60° Bearing 115° d C D N 325° e C D N 132° 3 Use a protractor to measure each of the angles shown. Write the bearing you need to walk on to get from X to Y. a Y X N b Y X N c Y X N 4 Draw a diagram, similar to those in Question 3, to show each bearing of Y from X. a 065° SAMPLE b 105° c 230° d 350° We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

167 14.1 Bearings Practice 5 This is part of Ivan’s homework. Question Write the bearing of B from A in this diagram. Answers Bearing is 152° A B N 208° 152° Is Ivan correct? Explain your answer. 6 The diagram shows the positions of a park and a library. N N Park Library a Write the bearing of the park from the library. b Write the bearing of the library from the park. 7 Bethan enters a running competition. The diagram shows the position of the start and finish and the four checkpoints Bethan must find. Measure and write the bearing Bethan takes to run from a the start to checkpoint 1 b checkpoint 1 to checkpoint 2 c checkpoint 2 to checkpoint 3 d checkpoint 3 to checkpoint 4 e checkpoint 4 to the finish. Tip To find the bearing of the park from the library, you need to measure the angle at the library. To find the bearing of the library from the park, you need to measure the angle at the park. N N N N N 1 2 3 4 Start/Finish SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

168 14 Position and transformation 8 a For each diagram, measure and write i the bearing of Y from X ii the bearing of X from Y. A N N X Y B N N X Y C N N X Y b What do you notice about each pair of answers in part a? c For each diagram i write the bearing of Y from X ii work out the bearing of X from Y. D N X N Y 83° E N X N Y 137° F N X N Y 22° SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

169 14.1 Bearings 9 a For each diagram, measure and write i the bearing of X from Y ii the bearing of Y from X. A N N X Y B N N X Y C N N X Y b What do you notice about each pair of answers in part a? c For each diagram i write the bearing of X from Y ii work out the bearing of Y from X. D N X N Y 232° E N X N Y 336° F N X N Y 198° Challenge 10 The diagram shows three points: A, B and C. The diagram is not drawn accurately. a Write the bearing of B from A. b Work out the bearing of A from B. c Show that the bearing of C from B is 110°. 120° A C B N N N SAMPLE 50° We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

170 14 Position and transformation d Read what Marcus says. Is Marcus correct? Explain your answer. e Do you think it is possible to work out the bearing of C from A? Explain your answer. 11 The diagram shows a regular hexagon, ABCDEF. All the internal angles are 120°. a Write the bearing to get from A to B. b Work out the bearing to get from i B to C ii C to D iii D to E iv E to F v F to A. c Show that the bearing to get from A to D is 150°. d Read what Zara says. I think the bearing of B from E is 030°. Is Zara correct? Explain your answer. I think the bearing of B from C is 300°. N A F B C E D 120° SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

171 14.2 The midpoint of a line segment 14.2 The midpoint of a line segment Key words line segment midpoint Exercise 14.2 Focus 1 The diagram shows three line segments, AB, CD and EF. Use the diagram to copy and complete these coordinates. –1–1 1 2 3 4 5 6 –2 –3 –4 –5 –6 F E D C A B 1 2 3 4 5 6 0 –2–3–4–5–6 y x a A is ( , ) B is ( , ) The midpoint of AB is ( , ) b C is ( , ) D is ( , ) The midpoint of CD is ( , ) c E is ( , ) F is ( , ) The midpoint of EF is ( , ) 2 Work out the midpoint of the line segment joining each pair of points. Write whether A, B or C is the correct answer. a (2, 3) and (2, 7) A (2, 4) B (2, 5) C (2, 10) b (8, 12) and (8, 20) A (8, 8) B (8, 15) C (8, 16) c (4, 1) and (6, 1) A (5, 1) B (2, 1) C (10, 1) d (2, 15) and (10, 15) A (12, 15) B (8, 15) C (6, 15) Tip You can plot the points on a coordinate grid to SAMPLE help you. We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

172 14 Position and transformation 3 Make a copy of this coordinate grid. Read what Sofia says. I think the midpoint of (1, 3) and (6, 3) is at (3, 3). Is Sofia correct? Use the coordinate grid to help you explain your answer. 4 The diagram shows four line segments, PQ, RS, TU and VW. Use the diagram to copy and complete these coordinates. a P is ( , ) Q is ( , ) The midpoint of PQ is ( , ) b R is ( , ) S is ( , ) The midpoint of RS is ( , ) c T is ( , ) U is ( , ) The midpoint of TU is ( , ) d V is ( , ) W is ( , ) The midpoint of VW is ( , ) 5 Copy and complete the workings to calculate the midpoint of the line segment joining each pair of coordinates. a (1, 4) and (7, 6) 1 7 2 4 6 2 8 2 10 2  + +      =      , ,  = ( ) , b (18, 0) and (8, 8) 18 8 2 0 8 2 2 2  + +      =       , , = ( ) , c (7, 3) and (5, 10)  + +      =       =       2 2 2 2 , , , d (1, 4) and (4, 15)  + +      =       =       2 2 2 2 , , , 0 2 3 1 4 y 1 4 2 3 5 6 x –1–1 1 2 3 4 5 6 –2 –3 –4 –5 –6 S R Q P U T W V 1 0 –2–3–4–5–6 2 3 4 5 6 y x SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

173 14.2 The midpoint of a line segment Practice 6 a A is the point (−8, 0), B is the point (6, 0) and C is the point (4, 10). Work out the midpoint of the line segments i AB ii AC iii BC. b Draw a coordinate grid. Plot the points A, B and C. Check your answers to part a by finding the midpoints on your diagram. 7 Find the midpoint of the line segment joining each pair of points. a (4, 2) and (10, 12) b (5, −3) and (−3, −7) c (−6, 8) and (8, −6). 8 Sasha works out the midpoint of the line joining the points (−3, 8) and (5, −2). This is what she writes. x-coordinate: –3+–2 2 = –5 2 =–2 1 2 y-coordinate: 8+5 2 = 13 2 =6 1 2 Midpoint is at –2 1 2 , 6 1 2 Is Sasha correct? Explain your answer. 9 ABCD is a rectangle. –2–3–4 –1 –2 –1 2 1 0 2 3 4 x y 1 –3 A B C D –4 –5 5 3 a Find the midpoint of the line segment AC. b Show that the midpoint of the line segment BD is the same as the midpoint of the line segment AC. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

174 14 Position and transformation Challenge 10 A is the point (2.4, 6.2), B is the point (3.6, 2.4) and C is the point (−3.8, −1.4). Find a the midpoint of AB b the midpoint of AC. 11 ABCD is a square. The coordinates of A are (−2, −6). The coordinates of C are (−3, −1). Where is the centre of the square? Explain how you worked out your answer. 12 P is the point (0, 9) and the midpoint of PQ is (5, 7). Find the coordinates of Q. 13 A is the point (16, 0) and B is the point (0, 8). C is the midpoint of AB. D is the midpoint of BC. E is the midpoint of CD. Show that the coordinates of E are (6, 5). 14 The midpoint of the line segment GH is at (3, 2). Work out three possible pairs of coordinates for G and H. Show all your working. 14.3 Translating 2D shapes Key words column vector image object translate Exercise 14.3 Focus 1 Match each column vector to the correct description. The first one is done for you: A and iv A 2 3       i Move the shape 2 units left and 3 units down B 2 −3       ii Move the shape 3 units right and 2 units up C − −       2 3 iii Move the shape 2 units left and 3 units up D  −      3 2 iv Move the shape 2 units right and 3 units up E  −      2 3 v Move the shape 3 units left and 2 units up F 3 2       SAMPLE vi Move the shape 2 units right and 3 units down We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

175 14.3 Translating 2D shapes 2 Write the missing numbers and words to complete each statement. a The column vector 4 5       means move the shape units right and 5 units . b The column vector  −      1 6 means move the shape 1 unit and units up. c The column vector 2 −4       means move the shape 2 units and 4 units . 3 Copy each diagram and translate the rectangle using the given column vector. a 0 2 3 1 4 1 4 2 3 x y 1 2       b 0 2 3 1 4 1 4 2 3 x y 2 −1       c 0 2 3 1 4 1 4 2 3 x y − −       1 2 4 The diagram shows object A on a coordinate grid. Copy the grid, then draw the image of shape A after each translation. a 2 1       b 1 −1       c  −      3 2 d − −       2 1 5 This is part of Adah’s homework. Question Translate shape B using the column vector 2 3 . Label the image B′. Answer x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 B B9 Is Adah’s answer correct? Explain your answer. –4 –3 –2 –1 0 1 2 A 3 4 –1 –2 –3 1 2 3 y x SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

176 14 Position and transformation Practice 6 The diagram shows shape C on a coordinate grid. a Copy the grid. Then translate shape C using the vector 1 −2      . Label the image C′. b Show that you can use the vector  −      1 2 to translate C′ back to C. c Explain how you can work out the column vector you must use to translate a shape back to its original position. 7 Write the column vector to translate a shape back to its original position after each translation. a 3 4       b 7 −8       c − −       1 9 d m n       8 The diagram shows shapes A, B, C and D on a coordinate grid. Write the column vector that translates a shape A to shape B b shape B to shape C c shape C to shape A d shape C to shape D. Challenge 9 The diagram shows trapezium GHIJ. Carla is going to translate GHIJ using the column vector  −      6 5 . Carla works out the coordinates of G′H′I′J′ first. This is what Carla writes. Coordinates of G′ are: (1, –3)+ –6 5 = (1+–6, –3+5) = (–5, 2) a Use Carla’s method to calculate the coordinates of H′, I′ and J′. b Make a copy of the diagram. Translate GHIJ using the column vector  −      6 5 . c Use your diagram in part b to check your answers to part a. x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 C x –1 –1–2–3–4 4 5321 0 –2 –3 y 2 1 5 3 4 6 7 8 –4 –5 6 7 A B D C x –1 –1–2–3–4 4 5321 0 –2 –3 y 2 1 5 3 4 –4 –5 G J SAMPLE IH We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

177 14.3 Translating 2D shapes 10 A parallelogram PQRS has vertices at the points P (−1, 1), Q (0, 3), R (3, 3) and S (2, 1). Aki is going to translate PQRS using the column vector 6 −4      . Aki works out that the coordinates of P′ are (5, −5). a Is Aki correct? Explain your answer. b Calculate the coordinates of Q′, R′ and S′. c Check your answers by drawing a diagram and translating parallelogram PQRS. 11 A square RSTU has vertices at R (2, 2), S (2, −2), T (−2, −2) and U (−2, 2). The square is translated and the image is labelled R′S′T′U′. The coordinates of R′ are (5, 3). a Write the column vector that translates RSTU to R′S′T′U′. b Work out the coordinates of S′, T′ and U′. c Check your answers by drawing a diagram and translating square RSTU. 12 The diagram shows shape A. a Translate shape A using the vector 2 −4      . Label the image B. b Translate shape B using the vector 2 3      . Label the image C. c What is the vector that translates shape A directly to shape C? What do you notice about your answer and the vectors in parts a and b? d Write the missing numbers in each statement. i Translating a shape 1 3       and then 5 2       is the same as the single vector       ii Translating a shape  −      2 6 and then − −       3 4 is the same as the single vector       e Use algebra to complete this rule. Translating a shape a b       and then c d       is the same as the single vector       y x 4 3 A 2 1 0 –1 –2 –2–3–4 –1 1 2 3 4 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

178 14 Position and transformation 14.4 Reflecting shapes Exercise 14.4 Focus 1 Match each equation with the correct lettered mirror line shown on the grid. The first one is done for you: A is y=5 x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 A B C D E 2 Copy and complete each reflection in the mirror line shown. a x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 y = 3 b x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 x = 3 Tip Remember, vertical lines start x=... and horizontal lines start y=... y=1 x=5 y=5 y=3 x=2 Tip Remember to reflect each shape one corner at a time, then join the points with straight lines. Key words equation mirror line reflect SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

179 14.4 Reflecting shapes 3 Copy each diagram and reflect the shape in the mirror line with the given equation. a mirror line y=3 b mirror line x=3 c mirror line x=4 4 Copy each diagram and reflect the shape in the mirror line with the given equation. a mirror line x=4 b mirror line y=4 c x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 mirror line y=3 5 This is part of Silvie’s homework. x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Question Reflect shape A in the line x=–2. Label the shape A′. –1–2–3–4 0 4321 x y 2 1 5 3 4 –6 –5 x = –2 A SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

180 14 Position and transformation Answer –1–2–3–4 0 4321 x y 2 1 5 3 4 –6 –5 x = –2 A A9 a Explain the mistake Silvie has made. b Copy the diagram of shape A and draw the correct reflection. Practice 6 The diagram shows shape B on a coordinate grid. Draw the image of shape B after it has been reflected in each line. a x=−1 b y=−2 c x=1.5 d y=−0.5 7 Make two copies of this diagram. a On the first diagram, reflect the triangle in the line x = 4. b On the second diagram, reflect the triangle in the line y=3. c Explain the method you use to reflect a shape when the mirror line goes through the shape. –1–2–3–4 0 321 x y 2 1 5 3 4 –5 4 5 6 7 –1 –5 –6 –4 –3 –2 B x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 SAMPLE 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

181 14.4 Reflecting shapes 8 The diagram shows three shapes, A, B and C. It also shows the line y=x. Make a copy of the diagram. Reflect A, B and C in the line y=x. Label their images A′, B′ and C′. 9 Look back at shapes A and A′ in Question 8. a The table shows the coordinates of the vertices of the object (A) and its image (A′). Copy and complete the table. Object (A) (3, 3) (3, 2) (5, 2) (5, 3) Image (A′) (3, 3) ( , ) ( , ) ( , ) b What do you notice about the coordinates of A and its image A′ ? c Write a rule you can use to work out the coordinates of the image of a shape when it is reflected in the line y=x. 10 The diagram shows shape ABCD on a coordinate grid. It also shows the line y=x. a Write the coordinates of the points A, B, C and D. When shape ABCD is reflected in the line y=x, the image is A′B′C′D′. b Use your rule from Question 9 to write the coordinates of the points A′, B′, C′ and D′. c Copy the diagram. Reflect shape ABCD in the line y=x. d Check the coordinates of the points A′, B′, C′ and D′ you worked out in part b are correct. Challenge 11 The diagram shows triangle EFG on a coordinate grid. It also shows the line y=−x. a Make a copy of the diagram. Reflect EFG in the line y=−x and label the image E′F′G′. b The table shows the coordinates of the vertices of the object and its image. –1–2–3–4 0 321 x y 2 1 5 3 4 –5 4 5 –1 –5 –4 –3 –2 A C B y = x x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B y = x C D –1–2–3–4 0 21 x y 2 1 5 3 4 –5 F G E SAMPLE y = – x We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

182 14 Position and transformation Copy and complete the table. Object E (−3, 3) F (−5, 1) G ( , ) Image E′ ( , ) F′ ( , ) G′ ( , ) c What do you notice about the coordinates of EFG and its image E′F′G′? d Write a rule you can use to work out the coordinates of the image of a shape when it is reflected in the line y=−x. 12 The diagram shows shape PQRS on a coordinate grid. It also shows the line y=−x. a Write the coordinates of the points P, Q, R and S. When shape PQRS is reflected in the line y=−x, the image is P′Q′R′S′. b Use your rule from Question 11 to write the coordinates of the points P′, Q′, R′ and S′. c Copy the diagram. Reflect shape PQRS in the line y=−x. d Check the coordinates of the points P′, Q′, R′ and S′ you worked out in part b are correct. 13 The diagram shows shapes A, B, C, D, E and F. –1–2–3–4 0 321 x y 2 1 5 3 4 –6 –5 4 5 6 –1 –5 –4 –3 –2 C A B E D F Choose the equation of the correct mirror line for each reflection. a A and B i x=2 ii y=4 iii x=4 b A and C i x=−1 ii y=−1 iii x=0 c C and D i y=2.5 ii y=2 iii x=2.5 d A and E i x=2 ii y=1 iii y=0 e E and F i x=0 ii x=−0.5 iii x=−1 –1–2–3 0 321 x y y = – x 2 1 3 4 5 –1 –5 –4 –3 –2 Q R S P SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

183 14.4 Reflecting shapes 14 Arun starts with this diagram. He reflects shape A in the line y=−x and labels the shape B. He translates shape B using the column vector 4 −1       and labels the shape C. He reflects shape C in the line y=x and labels the shape D. He reflects shape D in the line y=−1.5 and labels the shape E. He translates shape E using the column vector  −      5 2 and labels the shape F. He reflects shape F in the line x=−3 and labels the shape G. Read what Arun says. Is Arun correct? Explain your answer. Show all your working. –1–2–3–4 0 321 x y 2 1 5 3 4 –6 –5 4 5 6 6 –1 –5 –6 –4 –3 –2 A If I translate shape G using the column vector  −      1 5 the image will be in the same position as shape A. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

184 14 Position and transformation 14.5 Rotating shapes Key words anticlockwise centre of rotation clockwise Exercise 14.5 Focus 1 Copy each diagram and rotate the shapes 90° clockwise about the centre of rotation given. a y x 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 b y x 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 centre (2, 3) centre (3, 4) 2 Copy each diagram and rotate the shapes 180° about the centre of rotation given. a y x 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 b y x 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 centre (3, 3) centre (2, 4) Tip Use tracing paper to trace the shape, then put your pencil point on the centre of rotation and turn the paper 90° clockwise. Tip Use tracing paper to help. For 180° you can turn clockwise or anticlockwise. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

185 14.5 Rotating shapes 3 Rotate each shape 90° anticlockwise about the centre of rotation given. a y x 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 b y x 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 centre (3, 2) centre (4, 3) 4 Copy each diagram. On your copy, use the information given to rotate the shape. a 3210 x 0 y 2 1 3 4 4 5 6 7 5 6 180° centre (4, 5) b 3210 x 0 y 2 1 3 4 4 5 6 7 5 6 90° anticlockwise centre (6, 3) c 3210 x 0 y 2 1 3 4 4 5 6 7 5 6 90° clockwise centre (2, 1) Practice 5 The diagram shows shape C on a coordinate grid. Copy the diagram. Draw the image of shape C after a rotation of a 90° clockwise about the point (5, 3) b 90° anticlockwise about the point (2, 3) c 180° about the point (3, 2) d 180° about the point (4, 5). x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 C SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

186 14 Position and transformation 6 This is part of Simon’s classwork. Question Rotate triangle T 90 ° clockwise about centre (3, 2). Answer I have used a dotted line to show the image. 3210 x 0 y 2 1 3 4 4 5 6 5 6 T a What is wrong with Simon’s solution? b Copy the object onto squared paper and draw the correct image. 7 Copy and complete the description of the rotation that takes shape A to shape B in each diagram. a 3210 x 0 y 2 1 3 4 4 5 6 7 B A b rotation 180°, centre ( , ) rotation °, centre ( , ) 8 The diagram shows seven triangles. Match each rotation with the correct description. a A to B i 90° anticlockwise, centre (4, 3) b B to C ii 180°, centre (5, 6) c B to E iii 180°, centre (3, 5) d D to C iv 90° clockwise, centre (7, 1) e F to E v 180°, centre (4, 1) f F to G vi 90° clockwise, centre (3, 5) –1–2–3–4 0 321 x y 2 1 3 4 –6 –5 4 A B x 5 6 7 8 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 F G D B C A E SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

187 14.5 Rotating shapes Challenge 9 The diagram shows shapes A, B, C, D, E and F on a coordinate grid. Describe the rotation that transforms a shape A to shape B b shape B to shape C c shape C to shape D d shape D to shape E e shape E to shape F. 10 The diagram shows shape A on a coordinate grid. Make a copy of the diagram. a On the diagram, draw a rotation of shape A 90° clockwise about centre (3, 3). Label the image B. b On the diagram, draw a rotation of shape B 180° about centre (3, 4). Label the image C. c On the diagram, draw a rotation of shape C 90° anticlockwise about centre (6, 4). Label the image D. d Describe the rotation that takes shape A directly to shape D. e Describe the reflection that takes shape A directly to shape D. 11 The diagram shows triangle A on a coordinate grid. Make a copy of the diagram. a On the diagram, draw a rotation of triangle A 180° about centre (3, 3). Label the image B. b Describe two different transformations that will take triangle B back to triangle A. –1 x –1 –2 –3 –4 –5 –2–3–4 4321 0 y 2 1 3 4 –6 –5 5 6 A F B C E D x 5 6 7 8 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 A x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 A Tip A transformation can be a rotation, a reflection or a translation. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

188 14 Position and transformation 12 The diagram shows shape C on a coordinate grid. Make a copy of the diagram. a Draw the image of shape C after reflection in the line x=−1. Label the image D. b Draw the image of shape D after a translation using column vector 2 1      . Label the image E. c Draw the image of shape E after rotation 180° about centre (0, 1). Label the image F. d Describe the single transformation that will take shape F to shape C. e Describe the single transformation that will take shape D to shape F. –1–2–3–4 0 321 x y 2 1 5 6 3 4 –6 –5 4 5 6 –1 –5 –6 –4 –3 –2 C 14.6 Enlarging shapes Key words centre of enlargement enlargement scale factor Exercise 14.6 Focus 1 Copy and complete each enlargement. Use a scale factor of 2 and the centre of enlargement marked C. Follow these steps. Step 1 Count the number of squares from the centre of enlargement to the nearest corner of rectangle A. Multiply this number by 2 to find the new distance from the centre of enlargement. Plot this point. Step 2 Count the length and width of rectangle A, in squares. Multiply both dimensions by 2 to find the new length and width. Draw the enlarged rectangle A' from the corner SAMPLE you have already plotted. We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

189 14.6 Enlarging shapes a 2 × 2 = 4 squares 2 squares C A'A b 1 × 2 = 2 1 square C A A' c 2 1 1 C 2 A' A 2 Copy and complete each enlargement using a scale factor of 3 and the centre of enlargement marked C. a C b C c C d C SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

190 14 Position and transformation 3 Copy each shape onto squared paper. Enlarge each shape using the given scale factor and the centre of enlargement marked on the diagram. scale factor 2 scale factor 3 scale factor 4 scale factor 2 scale factor 3 scale factor 2 Practice 4 This is part of Amnon’s homework. Question and Answer Enlarge trapezium T using a scale factor of 3 and the centre of enlargement shown. T a Explain the mistake Amnon has made. b Make a copy of trapezium T on squared paper. Draw the correct enlargement. Tip Make sure you leave enough space around each shape to complete the enlargement. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

191 14.6 Enlarging shapes 5 The vertices of this triangle are at (2, 1), (2, 4) and (4, 2). a Make a copy of the diagram on squared paper. Mark with a dot the centre of enlargement at (1, 2). Enlarge the triangle using scale factor 2 from the centre of enlargement. b Write the coordinates of the vertices of the image. c Is there an invariant point on the object and image? Explain your answer. 6 The vertices of this parallelogram are at (1, 5), (3, 3), (5, 3) and (3, 5). a Make a copy of the diagram on squared paper. Mark with a dot the centre of enlargement at (2, 5). Enlarge the parallelogram using scale factor 2 from the centre of enlargement. b Write the coordinates of the vertices of the image. c Is there an invariant point on the object and image? Explain your answer. Challenge 7 The diagram shows four objects, A, B, C and D and their images after enlargement. For each object, describe the enlargement. x 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 A B C D x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 x 5 6 y 4 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

14 Position and transformation 8 The diagram shows pentagon ABCDE and its image A′B′C′D′E′. –1–2–3–4 0 321 x y 2 1 5 3 4 –9 –8 –7 –6 –5 6 7 D D9 A A9 C C9 B B9 E E9 a Write the scale factor of the enlargement. Read what Zara and Sofia say. b Who is correct? Explain how you worked out your answer. 9 The vertices of rectangle P are at (2, 2), (2, 5), (11, 5) and (11, 2). The vertices of rectangle Q are at (2, 2), (2, 3), (5, 3) and (5, 2). a Is rectangle P an enlargement of rectangle Q? Explain your answer. b What are the coordinates of the centre of enlargement? I think the centre of enlargement is at (2, 1). I think the centre of enlargement is at (2, 0). 192 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

193 Key words feet kilometre mile 15.1 Converting between miles and kilometres 15 Distance, area and volume Exercise 15.1 Focus 1 The table shows the approximate conversion between miles and kilometres. Copy the table. Follow the pattern to complete the table. Number of miles 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 Number of kilometres 8 16 24 32 2 Write true (T) or false (F) for each statement. a 3 miles is further than 3km. b 70km is further than 70 miles. c 12.5km is exactly the same distance as 12.5 miles. d 44km is not as far as 44 miles. e In one hour, a person walking at 3 miles per hour will go a shorter distance than a person walking at 3 kilometres per hour. 3 Read what Sofia says. Is Sofia correct? Explain your answer. Tip Remember that 1 mile is further than 1km. I have to travel 18 km to get to school. My mother has to travel 18 miles to get to work. I have to travel further to get to school than my mother SAMPLE has to travel to get to work. We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

194 15 Distance, area and volume 4 This flow chart converts kilometres to miles. Number of km ÷ 8 × 5 Number of miles Use the flow chart to copy and complete each conversion. a 16km 16÷8=2 2×5= miles b 48km 48÷8= ×5= miles c 72km 72÷ = × = miles 5 This flow chart converts miles into kilometres. Number of miles ÷ 5 × 8 Number of km Use the flow chart to copy and complete each conversion. a 15 miles 15÷5=3 3×8= km b 25 miles 25÷5= ×8= km c 40 miles 40÷ = × = km Practice 6 Convert each distance into miles. a 88km b 72km c 120km d 200km 7 Convert each distance into kilometres. a 30 miles b 300 miles c 45 miles d 4500 miles 8 Which is further, 128km or 75 miles? Show your working. 9 Which is further, 180 miles or 296km? Show your working. 10 Use only numbers from the rectangle to complete these statements. a 104km= miles b 95 miles= km c miles= km d km= miles Challenge 11 Work out the missing number in each conversion. Give your answer as a mixed number or a decimal. a 7 miles= km b 21 miles= km c 39 miles= km 12 Work out the missing number in each conversion. Give your answer as a mixed number in its simplest form. a 20km= miles b 34km= miles c 63km= miles 168 65 152 304 190 105 SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

195 15.1 Converting between miles and kilometres 13 Every car in the USA has a milometer. The milometer shows the total distance a car has travelled. When Johannes bought a used car, the milometer read: 008 935 miles When Johannes wanted to sell the car, the milometer read: 045 605 miles Johannes paid $13995 for the car. He is told that the value of his car goes down by 5 cents for every kilometre he drives. Johannes thinks he should get about $10 500 for his car. Is Johannes correct? Explain your answer. Show your working. 14 Sofia is a delivery driver. She lives in Lydenburg. On one day, she must deliver parcels to Marble Hall, Ngobi and Sun City. She can deliver the parcels in any order, but she must start and finish in Oxford. The table shows the distances between the cities in miles. The sketch map shows the positions of the cities. Distances between cities in miles Marble Hall 60 Lydenburg 125 75 Sun City 210 160 85 Ngobi Work out the shortest route Sofia can take. Give your answer in kilometres. 15 Mia and Shen go on a two-day walk. They draw graphs to show the distance they walk and their height above sea level each day. y x 2000 1750 1500 1250 1000 750 500 250 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 Distance walked in miles Distance/height chart: Day 1 Height above sea level in feet Ngobi Sun City Lydenburg Marble Hall SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

196 15 Distance, area and volume a How many miles did they walk on i Day 1 ii Day 2? b How many kilometres did they walk on i Day 1 ii Day 2? c Copy and complete the workings to find the total height, in feet, they climbed up on Day 1: From 250 feet to 500 feet=250 feet From 500 feet to 1000 feet=500 feet From 750 feet to 1500 feet= feet Total=250+500+ = feet d What is the total height, in feet, they climbed up on Day 2? e An approximate conversion from feet to metres is 10 feet=3 metres Work out the total height, in metres, they climbed up on i Day 1 ii Day 2. Mia and Shen work out the total time it should take them to do their walk each day using this rule: Total walk time=1 hour for every 5km walked+1 hour for every 600m height climbed up f Copy and complete these ratios: 1 hour : 5km 1 hour : 600m minutes : 5km minutes : 600m minutes : 1km minutes : 10m g Use your answers from parts b, e and f to work out the total time it should take them to do their walk on i Day 1 ii Day 2. y x 2000 1750 1500 1250 1000 750 500 250 0 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 Distance walked in miles Height above sea level in feet Distance/height chart: Day 2 Tip Look at the three sections on the graph where the height above sea level increased. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

197 15.2 The area of a parallelogram and trapezium 15.2 The area of a parallelogram and trapezium Key word trapezia Worked example 15.1 You can work out the area of a parallelogram by making the parallelogram into a rectangle like this: 2cm 2cm 3cm 3cm Answer area=base×height=3×2=6cm2 Exercise 15.2 Focus 1 Copy and complete the workings to find the area of each parallelogram. a area=base×height =4× = cm2 b area=base×height =2× = cm2 c area=base×height = × = cm2 2 Work out the area of each parallelogram. a 20 mm 8 mm b 5m Worked example 15.2 SAMPLE 9m We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

198 15 Distance, area and volume 3 Copy and complete the workings to find the area of each trapezium. a Step 1 4+6=10 Step 2 10÷2=5 Step 3 5×3= cm2 3cm 6cm 4cm b Step 1 5+ = Step 2 ÷2= Step 3 ×6= cm2 6cm 7cm 5cm c Step 1 + = Step 2 ÷2= Step 3 × = cm2 9cm 12cm 8cm Worked example 15.2 You can work out the area of a trapezium in three steps like this: Answer Step 1 top+bottom Step 2 step 1÷2 Step 3 step 2×height For example: Step 1 3+5=8 Step 2 8÷2=4 Step 3 4×6=24 area=24cm2 height bottom top 6cm 5cm 3cm SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.

199 15.2 The area of a parallelogram and trapezium 4 Work out the area of each of these trapezia. a 4m 7m 8m b 7cm 5cm 17cm 5 This is part of Jen’s homework. Question Work out the area of this parallelogram. Answer Area = bh = 12 × 8 = 96 am2 12cm 8mm a Explain the mistake Jen has made. b Work out the correct answer. Practice 6 Work out the area of each trapezium. Show all your working. a 2.5m 4m 9.5m b 15mm 10mm 8mm c 5.7cm 7cm 9.3cm 7 The diagram shows a trapezium. a Work out an estimate of the area of the trapezium. b Use a calculator to work out the accurate area of the trapezium. 8.7cm 6.2cm 14.9cm Tip To work out an estimate, round all the numbers to one significant figure. SAMPLE We are working with Cambridge Assessment International Education towards endorsement of this title. Original material © Cambridge University Press 2021. This material is not final and is subject to further changes prior to publication.